# Achilles Tendinopathy and Rupture | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Professional Articles    Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine  Achilles Tendinopathy and Rupture Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy   Peer reviewed by Dr Laurence Knott  Last updated 21 Mar 2022   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsThis article is for Medical Professionals  Professional Reference articles are designed for health professionals to use. They are written by UK doctors and based on research evidence, UK and European Guidelines. You may find the Achilles Tendon Rupture article more useful, or one of our other health articles.Read COVID-19 guidance from NICE  Treatment of almost all medical conditions has been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. NICE has issued rapid update guidelines in relation to many of these. This guidance is changing frequently. Please visit https://www.nice.org.uk/covid-19 to see if there is temporary guidance issued by NICE in relation to the management of this condition, which may vary from the information given below.In this article   What is an Achilles tendinopathy?   Achilles tendon rupture In This Article     Achilles Tendinopathy and RuptureIn this article What is an Achilles tendinopathy?  Achilles tendon rupture Synonym: Achilles tendinosis; Achilles tendinitis (no longer used)What is an Achilles tendinopathy?[1]Achilles tendinopathy is a chronic overuse injury of the Achilles tendon. It can affect anyone but is most common in active people, especially those who participate in sports which involve running or jumping.[2]The Achilles tendon begins near the mid-calf and inserts into the posterior of the calcaneus, connecting the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles to the ankle. It is surrounded by a connective tissue sheath (paratenon, or 'paratendon'), rather than a true synovial sheath. The paratenon, which is very vascular and highly innervated, stretches with movement, allowing maximum gliding action. Near the insertion of the tendon are two bursae - the subcutaneous calcaneal and the sub-tendinous calcaneal bursae - as well as Kager's fat pad, all of which can be a source of heel pain.Achilles tendinopathy generally occurs in the mid-substance of the tendon (55-65%), less commonly at the insertion (20-25%). The cause is not fully understood but is essentially a maladaptive response to increased loading that leads to thickening and stiffness of the tendon and then to dysrepair and degenerative changes.EpidemiologyAchilles tendinopathy typically affects athletes; long-distance runners have a lifetime risk of 52%.Achilles tendinopathy has an annual incidence of 2.35 per 1,000 adults registered with a GP.[3]Achilles tendinopathy has been thought to be more common in men than in women and it has been proposed that oestrogen protects tendons; however in a study of athletes aged over 40 there was no gender difference.[4] Similarly there was no gender difference identified in a GP-based cohort study.[3]Risk factorsThe Achilles tendon can experience forces of up to 12.5 times body weight during running.Activities such as running, jumping, dancing and tennis, where the tendon is susceptible to chronic overloading, are the likeliest associations. The main risk factors are:Rapid increase in the amount of time spent on the activity.Change in footwear or training surface, such as going from running on a treadmill to running on the road.Poor running technique, such as excessive pronation of the foot or forefoot, which may contribute to Achilles tendinopathyPoorly fitting footwear. Particularly, compression from firm or high heel tab on shoes may precipitate problems.Family history (increases risk 5x).Hypertension.Diabetes.Familial hypercholesterolaemia may present with Achilles tendon pain.[5]Insertional tendinopathy may be due to an enthesitis; ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis and psoriatic arthritis should be considered.Quinolone antibiotics (eg, ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin) can cause inflammation of tendons and predispose them to rupture.Achilles tendinopathy symptomsGradual onset of pain and stiffness over the tendon, which may improve with heat or walking and worsen with strenuous activity.Tenderness of the tendon on palpation: mid-substance tendinopathy is tender between 2-6 cm above the calcaneal insertion and insertional tendinopathy is tender at the insertion. There may also be crepitus and swelling.Pain on active movement of the ankle joint.NB: rupture of the tendon should always be excluded (always do Thompson's test - see under 'Examination', below).InvestigationsUltrasound or MRI may be necessary if the diagnosis is unclear and to differentiate between Achilles tendinopathy and partial-thickness tears.Treatment and management[1, 6]Immediate relief of symptoms of acute Achilles tendinopathy includes rest, application of ice and analgesics, including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and heel lifts (orthotic devices - used on both sides to prevent a gait imbalance).Gentle stretching of the front and back of the lower leg.The patient will need to alter their activities, at least in the short term; they may benefit from advice from a physiotherapist.If there is no improvement after 7-10 days of rest and gentle stretching, eccentric heel-drop exercises, first described by Alfredson, are the best treatment for Achilles tendinopathy:[7]This involves pushing up on to the toes of both feet then lowering over the edge of a step on the affected foot.There are two exercises, one is done with the knee straight and the second with the knee in flexion.Alfredson's research dictated three sets of 15 repeats of both exercises twice a day. This may be difficult for people to adhere to but they need to do as close to this many as they can of both exercises, twice a day.Eccentric loading may be painful.These exercises should be done daily for three months, with increasing load, and may need to be continued for much longer.There are many potential explanations as to why eccentric loading is effective, the likeliest being changes in neuromuscular control that reduce the tendon load.[8]A Cochrane review of injection therapies concluded that there is insufficient evidence, possibly due to the poor quality of the available research, to support the routine use of injection therapies and that more research is needed in this area, particularly in the older non-athletic population.[9] There is a risk of tendon atrophy and rupture with steroid injection.[10, 11] In the UK the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) does not approve steroid injections into or around the Achilles tendon.[12]There is some evidence that combining eccentric loading with extracorporeal shock-wave therapy (ESWT) is an effective treatment in recalcitrant Achilles tendinopathy.[13, 14]Autologous blood injection, using either whole blood or platelet-rich plasma, that contains growth factors, is safe but the efficacy is uncertain.[15]NICE advises that ESWT and autologous blood injection should only be used with special arrangements for clinical governance, consent and audit but encourages further research into both approaches.[16] ESWT can be painful.Topical glyceryl trinitrate used for six months may be effective but possibly no more so than a formal exercise programme.[17] It is not licensed for this use in the UK.Casting is an option for resistant Achilles tendinopathy.Surgery is sometimes used for resistant Achilles tendinopathy but usually as a last resort. Open surgery involves excision of fibrous adhesions and degenerative nodules. Minimally invasive operative treatments include tendon stripping or percutaneous tenotomy.[17]PrognosisAchilles tendinopathy recovery usually takes weeks to months. 85% of patients who have had achilles tendinopathy will have completely normal function with no symptoms eight years after their initial injury.[1]Achilles tendon rupture[18]Although the incidence of Achilles tendon injuries is increasing, the necessity for surgical intervention is decreasing due to improved conservative therapies, which may provide comparable outcomes without the implied surgical risk. If surgery is undertaken, no difference has been found between open and minimally invasive techniques.[19]Epidemiology[1]Achilles tendon rupture can occur at any age but most often occurs in recreational athletes aged 30-50 years. It is commonly seen in football, running, basketball, diving, tennis and other sports that require a forceful push off with the foot.Incidence is 7 injuries per 100,000 of the general population increasing to 12 per 100,000 in competitive athletes.Other causes are:Injury such as a fall, where there is forced dorsiflexion of the foot (producing a sudden stretch on the tendon).Deep lacerations over the site of the tendon.Risk factorsThese include:Increasing age.Chronic/recurrent Achilles tendinopathy.Steroids:Systemic corticosteroids (prolonged or high doses) or Cushing's syndrome.Previous steroid injections into or around the Achilles tendon.Systemic conditions - eg, gout, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus.Quinolone antibiotics, which triple the risk.[20] Risk is increased if there is concomitant steroid use.Achilles tendon rupture symptoms[21]The diagnosis may not be obvious initially and can be missed. It is important to look actively for features of Achilles tendon rupture, to do Thompson's test (see under 'Examination', below) and to refer if Achilles tendon rupture is suspected.HistoryAcute onset of pain in the tendon, felt as a sudden, sharp pain initially, sometimes described as the feeling of being hit in the back of the leg. A 'snap' may be heard as the tendon ruptures. The pain then settles into a dull ache.There may also be a history of less intense pain for several days before rupture.Patients may notice an inability to stand on tiptoe and altered gait (inability to push off with the affected foot).ExaminationObserve gait.There is usually localised swelling.There may be a palpable defect in the Achilles tendon (if rupture is complete rather than partial). However, the tendon defect may be masked by bruising.Active plantar flexion is weak or absent. (Some active flexion may be possible through the action of other muscles.)Thompson's test is performed with the patient lying prone with the knee passively flexed. Absence of normal plantar flexion on squeezing the calf muscle indicates a complete tendon rupture (compare with the other leg).Differential diagnosisAchilles tendinopathyRetrocalcaneal bursitisPlantaris muscle injuryPosterior ankle impingementSural nerve entrapmentOther ankle injuriesAnkle osteoarthritisRuptured Baker's cystDeep vein thrombosisInvestigationsUltrasound or MRI scan may help if the diagnosis is unclear (for example, to distinguish partial Achilles rupture from Achilles tendinopathy).Complete Achilles tendon rupture is usually diagnosed clinically by GPs. The extent of clinical misdiagnosis is unknown, but may be high. This is important as delayed treatment has unfavourable consequences. One paper in the BJGP reported how GPs in Norway used pocket-sized ultrasound to confirm complete Achilles tendon rupture.[22] GPs with no clinical ultrasound experience, recorded images with a pocket-sized ultrasound device under supervision to confirm a complete Achilles tendon rupture. This could present a new indication for GP ultrasound.Achilles tendon rupture treatment and managementNon-weight-bearing as soon as a rupture is suspected.Urgent referral to an orthopaedic specialist for assessment.Treatment options:[21]Open surgical treatment of acute Achilles tendon ruptures significantly reduces the risk of re-rupture compared with non-surgical treatment but produces significantly higher risks of complications, such as wound infection. Percutaneous surgery may reduce the risk of wound infection.[23]Surgery may be recommended for competitive athletes and others with a high level of physical activity; if there has been a delay in treatment or diagnosis; and for those with a recurrent rupture.Conservative management is an option, especially for older or less athletic patients. This consists of rest, pain control, a walking boot from two weeks and weight bearing as tolerated from four to six weeks. Physiotherapy to guide controlled early motion is important.[1]There are different approaches to rehabilitation. With both surgery and conservative treatment, a period of non-weight-bearing and a brace (orthosis) or plaster cast will be required. The use of a brace rather than a plaster cast may reduce complications. There is a trend towards earlier weight-bearing or early mobilisation using a removable orthosis, with some good results.[24]The management of chronic ruptures is more difficult than that used for acute tears, because of the retraction of the tendon ends, and the gap making primary repair impossible. Wound complications and infections are frequent after open procedures. Minimally invasive treatments provide good functional results and lower complications rates.[25]Editor's noteDr Sarah Jarvis, 14th April 2022Review of surgical vs non-surgical management of acute Achilles' tendon rupture[26] A multicentre randomised controlled trial comparing non-operative treatment, open repair, and minimally invasive surgery in 554 adults with acute rupture of the Achilles tendon concluded the following 12 months after rupture:The Achilles' tendon Total Rupture Score, looking at health status, changes from baseline in physical performance and patient-reported physical function, were similar between the groups.There was a higher rate of tendon re-rupture in the non-operative group (6.2%) than in the open-repair or minimally invasive surgery group (0.6% in each).The incidence of nerve injuries was 5.2% in the minimally invasive surgery group, 2.8% in the open-repair group and 0.6% in the non-operative group.ComplicationsAchilles tendon contracture and/or scarring may occur from excessive immobility.Re-rupture can occur. Traditionally, it was found that re-rupture rates were lower with surgery rather than conservative treatment.[23, 27]Deep vein thrombosis has a high incidence after Achilles tendon rupture.PrognosisAchilles tendon injury has a good prognosis but the slight loss of function may be very significant for the competitive athlete.Midportion Achilles tendinopathy can cause long-term absence from sports participation, and shows high recurrence rates.[28]Surgical treatment of acute Achilles tendon ruptures significantly reduces the risk of re-rupture compared with non-operative treatment but has a higher risk of other complications, including wound infection.[29]Athletes may be unable to resume full activities for one year.Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Extracorporeal shockwave therapy for Achilles tendinopathy; NICE Interventional Procedure Guidance, December 2016Asplund CA, Best TM; Achilles tendon disorders. BMJ. 2013 Mar 12346:f1262. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f1262.Silbernagel KG, Hanlon S, Sprague A; Current Clinical Concepts: Conservative Management of Achilles Tendinopathy. J Athl Train. 2020 May55(5):438-447. doi: 10.4085/1062-6050-356-19. Epub 2020 Apr 8.de Jonge S, van den Berg C, de Vos RJ, et al; Incidence of midportion Achilles tendinopathy in the general population. Br J Sports Med. 2011 Oct45(13):1026-8. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2011-090342.Longo UG, Rittweger J, Garau G, et al; No influence of age, gender, weight, height, and impact profile in achilles tendinopathy in masters track and field athletes. Am J Sports Med. 2009 Jul37(7):1400-5. doi: 10.1177/0363546509332250. Epub 2009 Mar 27.Beeharry D, Coupe B, Benbow EW, et al; Familial hypercholesterolaemia commonly presents with Achilles tenosynovitis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2006 Mar65(3):312-5. Epub 2005 Sep 21.Dilger CP, Chimenti RL; Nonsurgical Treatment Options for Insertional Achilles Tendinopathy. Foot Ankle Clin. 2019 Sep24(3):505-513. doi: 10.1016/j.fcl.2019.04.004. Epub 2019 May 22.van der Plas A, de Jonge S, de Vos RJ, et al; A 5-year follow-up study of Alfredson's heel-drop exercise programme in chronic midportion Achilles tendinopathy. Br J Sports Med. 2012 Mar46(3):214-8. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2011-090035. Epub 2011 Nov 10.O'Neill S, Watson PJ, Barry S; Why are eccentric exercises effective for Achilles tendinopathy? Int J Sports Phys Ther. 2015 Aug10(4):552-62.Kearney RS, Parsons N, Metcalfe D, et al; Injection therapies for Achilles tendinopathy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 May 265:CD010960. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010960.pub2.Nichols AW; Complications associated with the use of corticosteroids in the treatment of athletic injuries. Clin J Sport Med. 2005 Sep15(5):370-5.Vallone G, Vittorio T; Complete Achilles tendon rupture after local infiltration of corticosteroids in the treatment of deep retrocalcaneal bursitis. J Ultrasound. 2014 Jan 2917(2):165-7. doi: 10.1007/s40477-014-0066-9. eCollection 2014 Jun.Achilles tendinopathy; NICE CKS, June 2020 (UK access only)Al-Abbad H, Simon JV; The effectiveness of extracorporeal shock wave therapy on chronic achilles tendinopathy: a systematic review. Foot Ankle Int. 2013 Jan34(1):33-41. doi: 10.1177/1071100712464354.Rompe JD, Furia J, Maffulli N; Eccentric loading compared with shock wave treatment for chronic insertional achilles tendinopathy. A randomized, controlled trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2008 Jan90(1):52-61.Autologous blood injection for tendinopathy; NICE Interventional procedure guidance, January 2013Extracorporeal shockwave therapy for Achilles tendinopathy; NICE Interventional Procedure Guidance, December 2016Lopez RG, Jung HG; Achilles tendinosis: treatment options. Clin Orthop Surg. 2015 Mar7(1):1-7. doi: 10.4055/cios.2015.7.1.1. Epub 2015 Feb 10.Tarantino D, Palermi S, Sirico F, et al; Achilles Tendon Rupture: Mechanisms of Injury, Principles of Rehabilitation and Return to Play. J Funct Morphol Kinesiol. 2020 Dec 175(4). pii: jfmk5040095. doi: 10.3390/jfmk5040095.Egger AC, Berkowitz MJ; Achilles tendon injuries. Curr Rev Musculoskelet Med. 2017 Mar10(1):72-80. doi: 10.1007/s12178-017-9386-7.Sode J, Obel N, Hallas J, et al; Use of fluroquinolone and risk of Achilles tendon rupture: a population-based cohort study. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2007 May63(5):499-503. Epub 2007 Mar 3.Park SH, Lee HS, Young KW, et al; Treatment of Acute Achilles Tendon Rupture. Clin Orthop Surg. 2020 Mar12(1):1-8. doi: 10.4055/cios.2020.12.1.1. Epub 2020 Feb 13.GP-confirmed complete Achilles tendon rupture using pocket-sized ultrasound: a case report; BJGP Open (Aug 2017)Khan RJ, Carey Smith RL; Surgical interventions for treating acute Achilles tendon ruptures. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Sep 8(9):CD003674.Suchak AA, Bostick GP, Beaupre LA, et al; The influence of early weight-bearing compared with non-weight-bearing after surgical repair of the Achilles tendon. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2008 Sep90(9):1876-83.Maffulli N, Via AG, Oliva F; Chronic Achilles Tendon Rupture. Open Orthop J. 2017 Jul 3111:660-669. doi: 10.2174/1874325001711010660. eCollection 2017.Nonoperative or Surgical Treatment of Acute Achilles’ Tendon Rupture; New England Journal of Medicine (April 2022)Wilkins R, Bisson LJ; Operative versus nonoperative management of acute Achilles tendon ruptures: a quantitative systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Am J Sports Med. 2012 Sep40(9):2154-60. doi: 10.1177/0363546512453293. Epub 2012 Jul 16.Habets B, van den Broek AG, Huisstede BMA, et al; Return to Sport in Athletes with Midportion Achilles Tendinopathy: A Qualitative Systematic Review Regarding Definitions and Criteria. Sports Med. 2018 Mar48(3):705-723. doi: 10.1007/s40279-017-0833-9.Khan RJ, Fick D, Keogh A, et al; Treatment of acute achilles tendon ruptures. A meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2005 Oct87(10):2202-10.Related InformationAchilles Tendon RuptureAchilles TendinopathyTendinopathy and Tenosynovitis (Tendinosis)  I got results from an mri on my foot. I have yet to meet with the dr. to discuss. My foot has been painful for over a year now. How serious do these results look?   michael49124Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy Peer reviewed by  Dr Laurence Knott Document ID  1629 (v25)  Last updated on   21 March 2022 Next review date  20 March 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Achilles Tendinopathy and Rupture     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/doctor/achilles-tendinopathy-and-ruptureCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


