# Acute Pancreatitis: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Digestive Health    Gallstones and Bile  Acute Pancreatitis Last updated by Dr Pippa Vincent   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 5 Jan 2024   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Gallstones and Bile      Cholecystitis      ERCP In this series     Gallstones and Bile      Cholecystitis      ERCP Acute pancreatitis is an inflammation of the pancreas that develops quickly. The main symptom is abdominal pain. It usually settles in a few days but sometimes it becomes severe and very serious. The most common causes of acute pancreatitis are gallstones and drinking alcohol above recommended limits.In this article   What is acute pancreatitis?   How common is acute pancreatitis?   Acute pancreatitis symptoms   Causes of acute pancreatitis   What happens in acute pancreatitis?   What happens if acute pancreatitis is suspected?   When should I call a doctor?   Acute pancreatitis treatment   Can pancreatitis be prevented?   What is the outlook (prognosis) for acute pancreatitis?   What is the pancreas? In This Article     Acute PancreatitisIn this article What is acute pancreatitis?  How common is acute pancreatitis?  Acute pancreatitis symptoms  Causes of acute pancreatitis  What happens in acute pancreatitis?  What happens if acute pancreatitis is suspected?  When should I call a doctor?  Acute pancreatitis treatment  Can pancreatitis be prevented?  What is the outlook (prognosis) for acute pancreatitis?  What is the pancreas? What is acute pancreatitis?Pancreatitis means inflammation of the pancreas. Acute pancreatitis is inflammation that develops quickly, over 48 hours to a few days. It often goes away completely and leaves no permanent damage. Sometimes it can have longer lasting effects.(In chronic pancreatitis, the inflammation is persistent - it tends to cause less intense symptoms than acute pancreatitis but has longer lasting symptoms).How common is acute pancreatitis?Between 13-45 in 100,000 people have acute pancreatitis each year in the UK. Acute pancreatitis has become more common in recent years. This is partly due to an increase in the incidence of obesity.Acute pancreatitis symptomsPeople with acute pancreatitis tend to experience the following symptoms:Abdominal pain, just below the ribs, is the usual main symptom. It usually builds up quickly (over a few hours) and may last for several days. The pain can become severe and often spreads through to the back. The pain may be sudden and intense, or it may begin as a mild pain that is aggravated by eating and slowly grows worse. It is occasionally possible to have acute pancreatitis without any pain; this is more common in people with diabetes or kidney problems.Being sick (vomiting). A high temperature (fever) and generally feeling very unwell are common.Swollen abdomen.If the pancreatitis becomes severe and other organs become involved (for example, the heart, lungs or kidneys) then various other symptoms may develop. Dehydration and low blood pressure may develop.Acute pancreatitis can cause people to become extremely unwell and can be life-threatening.Causes of acute pancreatitisGallstones or alcohol cause more than 8 in 10 cases of acute pancreatitis. Other causes of acute pancreatitis are relatively rare.GallstonesGallstones are the most common cause of acute pancreatitis in the UK. A gallstone can pass through the bile duct and out into the duodenum (the part of the gut just after the stomach). This usually does not cause a problem.However, in some people the gallstone becomes stuck in the bile duct or where the bile duct and pancreatic duct open into the duodenum. This can affect the chemicals (enzymes) in the pancreatic duct or even block them completely, and this can trigger acute pancreatitis.AlcoholAbout a third of cases of acute pancreatitis are associated with alcohol, although the relationship is not clear. It seems that, whilst alcohol itself does not damage the cells of the pancreas, it makes them more sensitive to damage from other causes such as smoking, high fat content in the blood or infections. Many patients with chronic alcoholic pancreatitis have a history of recurrent acute pancreatitis triggered by alcohol abuse.High blood fat levelsThis is known as hypertriglyceridaemia. It is reported to cause 1-4% of all cases of acute pancreatitis and up to 56% of pancreatitis cases during pregnancy.Less common causesThese include the following:Viral infections (for example, the mumps virus, HIV).A rare side-effect to some medicines.Injury or surgery around the pancreas.Infections with parasites (parasites are living things (organisms) that live within (or on) another organism).High levels of blood calcium.Abnormal structure of the pancreas.There is also a rare form of pancreatitis which can be inherited from a parent (hereditary).AutoimmuneThis is where the body's own immune system attacks the pancreas. This can be associated with other autoimmune diseases - for example, Sjögren's syndrome and primary biliary cirrhosis.UnknownThis is where no cause is found and occurs in about 1 in 10 cases. However, a number of these cases are probably due to tiny gallstones or 'gallstone sludge' which passes through the bile duct but is too small to be seen on scans or other tests.What happens in acute pancreatitis?The digestive chemicals (enzymes) that are made in the pancreas become activated and start to 'digest' parts of the pancreas. These enzymes are normally only activated after they reach the part of the duodenum.This leads to a range of chemical reactions that cause inflammation in the pancreas. How the above causes actually trigger this sequence of events is not clear.In most pancreatitis cases (about 4 in 5), the inflammation is mild and settles within a week or so. Symptoms may be bad for a few days but then settle and the pancreas fully recovers.In some pancreatitis cases (about 1 in 5), the inflammation quickly becomes severe. Parts of the pancreas and surrounding tissues may die (necrose). Pancreatic enzymes and chemicals may get into the bloodstream and cause inflammation and damage to other organs in the body. This can lead to shock and organ failure such as respiratory failure, kidney failure and other complications. This is a very serious situation which can be fatal.What happens if acute pancreatitis is suspected?Anyone with suspected acute pancreatitis will be admitted to hospital for tests to rule out other problems (as many conditions can cause similar symptoms) and to confirm the diagnosis.Blood tests can check the blood level of amylase and/or lipase (these are digestive enzymes made by the pancreas). Although not 100% reliable, a high blood level of these enzymes would strongly suggest that pancreatitis is the cause of the symptoms.An ultrasound scan may be done to look for a gallstone if this is the suspected underlying cause. Other types of scans such as CT scans may be needed if an ultrasound scan does not give a clear answer.When should I call a doctor?Medical advice should always be sought for persistent new severe abdominal pain.Acute pancreatitis treatmentThe treatment depends on how bad the attack of acute pancreatitis is. There is no specific treatment that will take the inflammation away. However, in most cases the pancreatitis settles over a few days, although symptoms can get worse before they get better.Strong painkillers by injection are usually needed to ease the pain.A nasogastric tube (a feeding tube passed through the nose into the stomach) may occasionally also be passed to suck out the fluid from the stomach. This can be useful in someone who is being sick (vomiting) a lot.A nasogastric tube may also be passed to provide food as people with acute pancreatitis are unable to eat properly.A 'drip' is needed to give fluid into the body until symptoms settle.A catheter - a thin tube going into your bladder to drain urine - is likely to be inserted so the doctors can monitor accurately the amount of urine being passed.Less commonly, complications develop and the situation can become very serious. Other treatments that may then be needed include the following:Intensive care treatment. Someone with a severe attack of pancreatitis will be monitored very closely in the intensive care unit.A procedure to remove a blocked gallstone if this is found to be the cause.Antibiotics if the pancreas or surrounding tissue becomes infected.Surgery is sometimes needed to remove infected or damaged tissue.Can pancreatitis be prevented?An attack of acute pancreatitis may be a one-off event. However, if there is an underlying cause, then it may happen again (recur) unless the cause is corrected. One of the following may be relevant to prevent a recurrence, depending on the cause:An operation to remove the gallbladder is usually advised if a gallstone was the cause.A high blood fat level (hyperlipidaemia) is sometimes the cause. This may need treating with medication.A side-effect from some medication is a rare cause of acute pancreatitis. A change in medication may be needed if this is the cause of pancreatitis.Alcohol-related concerns:Alcohol should be completely avoided for at least several months after a bout of acute pancreatitis, even if alcohol was not the cause of the pancreatitis.If alcohol is the cause of pancreatitis, alcohol should be stopped altogether permanently.Sometimes a pancreatitis is the first indication of an alcohol dependency problem. Further help, advice and counselling may be offered if this is the case. It can be very difficult to stop drinking without some extra support.What is the outlook (prognosis) for acute pancreatitis?Acute pancreatitis is classified as mild if no complications develop (about 4 in 5 cases). In these cases the outlook is very good and full recovery is usual.Severe acute pancreatitis (about 1 in 5 cases) means that one or more complications develop. Despite intensive care treatment, the mortality rate of people with severe acute pancreatitis is around a quarter.What is the pancreas?The pancreas is in the upper abdomen and lies behind the stomach and guts (intestines). It makes a fluid that contains chemicals (enzymes) which are needed to digest food.The enzymes are made in the pancreatic cells and are passed into tiny tubes (ducts). These ducts join together like branches of a tree to form the main pancreatic duct. This drains the enzyme-rich fluid into the part of the gut just after the stomach (called the duodenum). The enzymes are in an inactive form in the pancreas (otherwise they would digest the pancreas). They are 'activated' in the duodenum to digest food. Our picks for Acute Pancreatitis Gallstones diet sheetGallstones occur when bile, which is normally fluid, forms stones in your gallbladder. This is t...  Gallstones diet sheet  Could it be gallstones?   4min  Summer crunch salad   10min  What does the pancreas do?Groups of special cells called 'islets of Langerhans' are scattered throughout the pancreas. These cells make the hormones insulin and glucagon. The hormones are passed (secreted) directly into the bloodstream to control the blood sugar level.The bile duct carries bile from the liver and gallbladder. This joins the pancreatic duct just before it opens into the duodenum. Bile also passes into the duodenum and helps to digest food.Diagram showing detail around the pancreasWant to see a dietician?Book a private assessment with a qualified dietician today. Book now Previous article   Cholecystitis Next article  ERCP  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Pancreatitis; NICE Guidance (Sept 2018 - last updated 16 December 2020)Babu RY, Gupta R, Kang M, et al; Predictors of surgery in patients with severe acute pancreatitis managed by the step-up approach. Ann Surg. 2013 Apr257(4):737-50. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e318269d25d.Clemens DL, Schneider KJ, Arkfeld CK, et al; Alcoholic pancreatitis: New insights into the pathogenesis and treatment. World J Gastrointest Pathophysiol. 2016 Feb 157(1):48-58. doi: 10.4291/wjgp.v7.i1.48.Ding N, Sun YH, Wen LM, et al; Assessment of prophylactic antibiotics administration for acute pancreatitis: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Chin Med J (Engl). 2020 Jan 20133(2):212-220. doi: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000000603.Gapp J, Chandra S; Acute Pancreatitis. StatPearls, Jan 2020.Chatila AT, Bilal M, Guturu P; Evaluation and management of acute pancreatitis. World J Clin Cases. 2019 May 67(9):1006-1020. doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v7.i9.1006.Related InformationWhat does the pancreas do?Acute Pancreatitis (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment) ProNausea and VomitingJaundiceEndoscopic Ultrasound Scan  Gallstones diet sheet  Could it be gallstones?    4 minutes reading time  22-Feb-23  Summer crunch salad    10min cooking time   Can you get gallstones when you're young?    4 minutes reading time  09-Oct-17  I was diagnosed with Pancreatitis 8 months ago.  I went to the ER and was hospitalized for 2 days with no food or water until the pain subsided.  The doctors told me to give up alcohol so I haven't...   dan46095Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Pippa Vincent Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  4568 (v44)  Last updated on   05 January 2024 Next review date  02 January 2029 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  CholecystitisNext article ERCP Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Acute Pancreatitis: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/digestive-health/gallstones-and-bile/acute-pancreatitisCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


