# Acute Stress Reaction: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Mental Health    Stress Management  Acute Stress Reaction Last updated by Dr Suchita Shah, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP  Last updated 14 Jul 2022   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Stress Management      Mindfulness In this series     Stress Management      Mindfulness An acute stress reaction typically occurs after an unexpected life crisis, such as a serious accident, sudden bereavement, or other traumatic event.In this article   What is an acute stress reaction?   What are the symptoms of an acute stress reaction?   What are the treatments for acute stress reaction?   When does an acute stress reaction become a mental health problem?   What if my symptoms persist? In This Article     Acute Stress ReactionIn this article What is an acute stress reaction?  What are the symptoms of an acute stress reaction?  What are the treatments for acute stress reaction?  When does an acute stress reaction become a mental health problem?  What if my symptoms persist? What is an acute stress reaction?An acute stress reaction occurs when a person experiences certain symptoms after a particularly stressful event. The word 'acute' means the symptoms develop quickly but do not last long. The events are usually very severe and an acute stress reaction typically occurs after an unexpected life crisis. This might be, for example, a serious accident, sudden bereavement, or other traumatic events. Acute stress reactions may also occur as a consequence of sexual assault or domestic violence.Acute stress reactions have been seen in people who experience terrorist incidents, major disasters, or war. Military personnel are at more risk as a result of extreme experiences during conflicts.An acute stress reaction usually resolves within 2 to 3 days (often hours).Looking for a counsellor?Video appointments with qualified counsellors are now available in Patient Access Book now What are the symptoms of an acute stress reaction?Symptoms usually develop quickly over minutes or hours - reacting to the stressful event. Symptoms of acute stress reactions may include the following:Psychological symptoms such as anxiety, low mood, irritability, emotional ups and downs, poor sleep, poor concentration, wanting to be alone.Recurrent dreams or flashbacks, which can be intrusive and unpleasant.Avoidance of anything that will trigger memories. This may mean avoiding people, conversations, or other situations, as they cause distress and anxiety.Reckless or aggressive behaviour that may be self-destructive.Feeling emotionally numb and detached from others.Physical symptoms such as:A 'thumping heart' (palpitations).A feeling of sickness (nausea).Chest pain.Headaches.Tummy (abdominal) pains.Breathing difficulties.The physical symptoms are caused by stress hormones, such as adrenaline (epinephrine), which are released into the bloodstream, and by overactivity of nervous impulses to various parts of the body.What are the treatments for acute stress reaction?Acute stress reaction is no longer considered to be a mental health disorder. There is no set timeline for grief or response to stressful events, and many of the symptoms described above are to be expected. No treatment for acute stress reaction may be needed, as symptoms usually go once the stressful event is over and usually within a few days. Understanding the cause of the symptoms, or talking things over with a friend or family member, may help.When does an acute stress reaction become a mental health problem?If symptoms of an acute stress reaction last longer than three days but less than a month, this is called an acute stress disorder (ASD). Acute stress disorder is not universally recognised as a medical condition and what you are experiencing may still be a normal or appropriate response for you, in your circumstances. However, if you are struggling, one or more of the following may help:Self-care and practical supportIf necessary, ensure that you are physically safe. Talking things over with family, friends, or a professional can help. Regular exercise, healthy diet, regular sleep, and limiting caffeine and alcohol are good for your general mental health.Although alcohol may apparently give short-term relief of symptoms it can be damaging. Drinking alcohol to 'calm nerves' may lead to problems with low mood, worse anxiety and problem drinking and is not recommended.You may wish to contact your doctor or other healthcare professional for practical support, connection with social support, information about self-care and coping strategies, or referral for psychological therapies.Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)CBT is a talking therapy and is based on the idea that certain ways of thinking can trigger or fuel certain mental health problems. It is the treatment of choice for acute stress disorder.CounsellingCounselling helps you to explore ways of dealing with stress and stress symptoms. This may be available locally but some charities also offer online resources and helplines that may be useful. Some organisations specialise in bereavement counselling.However, not everyone needs to process trauma as soon as possible after the incident. Indeed, interventions such as Psychological Debriefing immediately after trauma or critical incidents can make things worse, and are not recommended.MedicationsGenerally, medications are not as effective as psychological therapies in treating acute stress disorder and should not routinely be used.A beta-blocker is one medicine that can help relieve some physical symptoms that are caused by the release of stress hormones. Beta-blockers are not addictive, are not tranquillisers and do not cause drowsiness or affect performance. You can take them as required.Sometimes, medications are given to help with specific problems like lack of sleep, pain, or depression, but you should discuss these with your doctor.What if my symptoms persist?Some people who have an acute stress reaction will find their symptoms persist for longer than one month. It may be necessary to discuss these symptoms with your doctor. There may be another explanation for your symptoms. Some people with long-term symptoms may need to be assessed to see if post-traumatic stress disorder is a possibility.Previous article   Stress Management Next article  Mindfulness  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Bryant RA; Acute stress disorder. Curr Opin Psychol. 2017 Apr14:127-131. doi: 10.1016/j.copsyc.2017.01.005. Epub 2017 Jan 18.Kavan MG, Elsasser GN, Barone EJ; The physician's role in managing acute stress disorder. Am Fam Physician. 2012 Oct 186(7):643-9.Anxiety disorders; NICE Quality Standards, Feb 2014Rahnama M, Shahdadi H, Bagheri S, et al; The Relationship between Anxiety and Coping Strategies in Family Caregivers of Patients with Trauma. J Clin Diagn Res. 2017 Apr11(4):IC06-IC09. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2017/25951.9673. Epub 2017 Apr 1.Rose S, Bisson J, Churchill R, et al; Psychological debriefing for preventing post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002(2):CD000560.Related InformationAcute Stress Reaction ProGeneralised Anxiety Disorder (Symptoms and Treatment) ProControlled Breathing (Pursed Lips Breathing)Obsessive-compulsive Disorder (OCD) ProPanic Disorder Pro  Why self-care for men is so important    7 minutes reading time  22-Feb-24  Stress-relieving tips to try every day    6 minutes reading time  22-Feb-24  Improving mental and physical health through exercise     3 minutes reading time  20-Sep-17  Can regular massages improve your mental health?    5 minutes reading time  06-Nov-21  The last year of my life has been a brutal one. At the age of 22, I am in the lowest of lows and I desperately need some help!Here’s my tale:About a year ago, a couple months after an extremely...   TaylorMasonJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Suchita Shah, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Document ID  4465 (v42)  Last updated on   14 July 2022 Next review date  13 July 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Stress ManagementNext article Mindfulness Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Acute Stress Reaction: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/mental-health/stress-management/acute-stress-reactionCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


