# Alcoholism and Problem Drinking | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Healthy Living    Liver Disease and Alcohol (Effects of Alcohol Abuse)  Alcoholism and Problem Drinking Last updated by Dr Doug McKechnie, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP  Last updated 24 Feb 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Liver Disease and Alcohol (Effects of Alcohol Abuse)      Alcohol and Sensible Drinking - Safe Limits of Alcohol      Alcohol Withdrawal      Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease      Dealing with Poisoning In this series     Liver Disease and Alcohol (Effects of Alcohol Abuse)      Alcohol and Sensible Drinking - Safe Limits of Alcohol      Alcohol Withdrawal      Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease      Dealing with Poisoning Many people drink alcohol. For some, alcohol is something that they enjoy in moderation. Other people drink alcohol at levels that are likely to lead to physical or mental health problems. Some people can find it very difficult to control, or stop, their drinking.In this article   What is alcoholism?   Problems with drinking alcohol   Low-risk drinking   Hazardous drinking   Harmful drinking   Alcohol dependence   What are the symptoms of alcohol dependence?   The problem of denial   Should I cut back, or should I stop alcohol completely?   Self-help   Do you need help?   Detoxification   After detoxification and staying off alcohol In This Article     Alcoholism and Problem DrinkingIn this article What is alcoholism?  Problems with drinking alcohol  Low-risk drinking  Hazardous drinking  Harmful drinking  Alcohol dependence  What are the symptoms of alcohol dependence?  The problem of denial  Should I cut back, or should I stop alcohol completely?  Self-help  Do you need help?  Detoxification  After detoxification and staying off alcohol What is alcoholism?Alcoholism is a word which many people use to mean alcohol dependence (alcohol addiction). Some people are problem drinkers without being dependent on alcohol. If you are alcohol-dependent then detoxification ('detox') can help you to stop drinking, alongside other support.Problems with drinking alcoholThere are roughly four levels of alcohol drinking - low-risk, hazardous, harmful, and dependent. As a rule, each level increases the risk to your health and safety.Low-risk drinkingMany people drink some alcohol. It's thought that drinking within the UK's recommended maximum limits has a low risk of causing health problems. The recommended maximum limits are a maximum of 14 units of alcohol a week, spread across three days or more, with several alcohol-free days a week.This is low-risk, but not completely safe; any amount of alcohol increases the risk of health problems, such as some types of cancer, although at these levels the risk is low. However, even a small amount of alcohol can be dangerous if you drive, you operate machinery, or you take some types of medication.Hazardous drinkingThis is a pattern of drinking which increases the risk of harm. It can be defined as drinking more than 14, but less than 35, units of alcohol a week for women, and more than 14, but less than 50, units of alcohol a week for men. Hazardous drinking increases the risk of health problems from alcohol.Read more about alcohol and sensible drinking.Harmful drinkingHarmful drinking is where alcohol consumption is directly causing health problems (such as depression, anxiety, alcohol-related accidents, or liver damage), or other issues, like harming relationships or negatively affecting life in other ways.Health risksAlmost 1 in 4 adults in England and Wales drink more than the safe levels. This is thought to be more common in men than in women, but it's probably under-reported in women. Many people who drink heavily are not addicted to alcohol and are not alcohol-dependent. To stop or reduce alcohol would not be a problem if there was the will to do so. However, for various reasons, many people have got into a habit of drinking regularly and heavily. But, drinking heavily is a serious health risk.If you drink heavily you have an increased risk of developing:Alcohol-related liver problems.Some cancers (for example, mouth, throat, liver, colon and breast).Stomach disorders.Severe inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis).Mental health problems, including depression, anxiety and various other problems.Wernicke's encephalopathy - an alcohol-related brain disorder treated with vitamin B1 (thiamine); Korsakoff syndrome is a chronic memory disorder caused by severe deficiency of vitamin B1, most commonly caused by alcohol misuse.Sexual difficulties such as impotence.Muscle and heart muscle disease.High blood pressure.Damage to nervous tissue.Accidents:Drinking alcohol is associated with a much increased risk of accidents.In particular, injury and death from fire and car crashes. About 1 in 7 road deaths are caused by drinking alcohol.Obesity (alcohol is calorie-rich). One glass of wine has as many calories as a bag of crisps and a pint of lager is the calorie equivalent of a sausage roll.Damage to an unborn baby in pregnant womenAlcohol gets to a baby through the placenta if a pregnant woman drinks alcohol. A baby cannot process alcohol very well. So, any alcohol in your baby stays in their body much longer than in you. This is known to be a risk for causing serious problems such as:A low birth weight.Learning, behavioural and thinking (cognitive) problems.Defects of the heart and other organs.Abnormal facial features.When these problems are severe, the condition is called fetal alcohol syndrome.We know that heavy alcohol use in pregnancy is harmful. We don't know if there is any safe level of alcohol in pregnancy, so pregnant women, and women planning a pregnancy, are advised to avoid alcohol completely.There is a small amount of evidence that suggests that women who drink occasionally in early pregnancy - before they knew they were pregnant - do not seem to have a high risk of pregnancy problems, but we don't have enough data to be sure.Alcohol drinking and problems to othersHeavy alcohol drinking in one person often seriously damages others. Many families have become severely affected by one member becoming a problem drinker. Emotional and financial problems often occur in such families. It is estimated that 3 in 10 divorces, 4 in 10 cases of domestic violence and 2 in 10 cases of child abuse are alcohol-related. Often, the problem drinker denies or refuses to accept that the root cause is alcohol.Alcohol dependenceSome people are dependent on alcohol. This can also be called alcohol addiction. People with alcohol dependence feel a strong urge to drink, and often find that they need to drink more and more alcohol to get the same effect. People with alcohol dependence often prioritise drinking over other things - such as family life, relationships, work, and other interests - or continue drinking despite evidence that it's causing harm.People with alcohol dependence may also get unpleasant, and potentially dangerous, withdrawal symptoms, and use alcohol to prevent these happening. In the UK, roughly 600,000 people have alcohol dependency.What are the symptoms of alcohol dependence?Ready to hit your weight loss goals?Find a range of services to suit you, from medication through to managed programs Book now If you are alcohol-dependent you have a strong desire for alcohol and have great difficulty in controlling your drinking. In addition, your body is used to lots of alcohol. Therefore, you may develop withdrawal symptoms 3-8 hours after your last drink as the effect of the alcohol wears off. So, even if you want to stop drinking, it is often difficult because of withdrawal symptoms. The symptoms include:Feeling sick (nausea).The 'shakes' (trembling).Sweating.Craving for alcohol.Feeling unwell.Convulsions or seizures - these occur in a small number of cases.As a result, you drink alcohol regularly and depend on it to prevent withdrawal symptoms. If you do not have any more alcohol, withdrawal symptoms usually last 5-7 days but a craving for alcohol may continue for longer.If you have alcohol dependence, suddenly stopping drinking completely can be dangerous. Seek medical advice and support about the best way of reducing and stopping safely.The severity of dependence can vary. It can develop gradually and become more severe. You may be developing alcohol dependence if you:Often have a strong desire to drink alcohol and need a drink every day.Drink alone often.Need a drink to stop trembling (the shakes).Drink early, or first thing in the morning (to avoid withdrawal symptoms).Spend a lot of your time in activities where alcohol is available. For example, if you spend a lot of time at the social club or pub.Neglect other interests or pleasures because of alcohol drinking.If you are alcohol-dependent you are usually tolerant to the effect of alcohol. This means that you need more alcohol to notice any effects and to become drunk. This can make things worse, as it tends to make you drink even more.If you are alcohol-dependent you may get drunk regularly. However, you may not get drunk. You may drink small amounts regularly to keep any withdrawal symptoms away. You may then be able to hide your problem from others. However, you are still at serious risk of developing conditions due to excessive drinking (liver damage (cirrhosis), cancers, etc).The problem of denialSome people who are heavy drinkers or who are alcohol-dependent deny that they have a problem. The sort of thoughts that people deceive themselves with include:"I can cope.""I'm only drinking what all my mates drink.""I can stop at any time."Coming to terms with the fact that you may have a problem and seeking help when needed are often the biggest step to sorting out the problem.If you feel that you need, or a relative or friend needs, help about alcohol, see your doctor or practice nurse.Should I cut back, or should I stop alcohol completely?If you are alcohol-dependent then it is best to cut back gradually and then stop alcohol completely. Do not stop alcohol suddenly if you are alcohol-dependent. Some withdrawal effects can be severe. This is why it is best to cut down gradually and then stop, or see your doctor about a 'detox'. Also, it is best to cut out alcohol completely if you have a condition due to alcohol, such as liver damage (cirrhosis). Otherwise, reducing to a safe level of drinking is an option.If you are trying to cut down, some tips which may help include:Consider drinking low-alcohol beers, or at least do not drink strong beers or lagers.Try pacing the rate of drinking. Perhaps alternate soft drinks with alcoholic drinks.If you eat when you drink, you may drink less.It may be worth reviewing your entire social routine. For example, consider:Cutting back on types of social activity which involve drinking.Trying different social activities where drinking is not involved.Reducing the number of days in the week where you go out to drink.Going out to the pub or club later in the evening.Trying to resist any pressure from people who may encourage you to drink more than you really want to.Self-helpSome people are helped by books, websites, leaflets and their own determination. It is thought that about 1 in 3 people who have a problem with alcohol return to sensible drinking, or stop drinking, without any professional help.Do you need help?Help and treatment are available if you find that you cannot cut down your drinking to safe limits. Counselling and support from a doctor, nurse, or counsellor are often all that is needed.Talking treatmentsSome people are helped by counselling and advice from a practice nurse or doctor. Sometimes a referral to a specially trained counsellor may be advised. They can help you to talk through the issues in more detail and help you to plan how to manage your drinking. In some cases, more intensive talking treatments such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), motivational interviewing, or motivational enhanced therapy may be appropriate. For example, CBT helps you to change certain ways that you think, feel and behave; it may help some people with alcohol problems.Talking treatments are particularly useful for children with alcohol-related problems who are aged between 10 and 17. Children may also be offered family therapy in which other members of their family may be involved in a course of treatment.DetoxificationA 'detox' (detoxification) treatment may be advised if you are alcohol-dependent. Referral for specialist help may be best for some people.Alcohol detoxification involves taking a short course of a medicine which helps to prevent withdrawal symptoms when you stop drinking alcohol. Benzodiazepine medicines such as chlordiazepoxide or diazepam are used for detox. Read more about alcohol withdrawal and detox.After detoxification and staying off alcoholMany people who successfully 'detox' go back to drinking heavily again at some point. There are various reasons why this may occur. It is thought that you are less likely to return to drinking heavily if you have counselling or other support to help you to stay off alcohol. Your doctor, practice nurse, or local drug and alcohol unit may provide ongoing support when you are trying to stay off alcohol. Self-help groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous have also helped many people to stay off alcohol.If you do go back to heavy drinking, you can always try again to stop or cut down. Some people take several attempts before they stop drinking, or keep within the safe limits, for good.Previous article   Alcohol and Sensible Drinking - Safe Limits of Alcohol Next article  Alcohol Withdrawal  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Alcohol-use disorders: diagnosis, assessment and management of harmful drinking and alcohol dependence; NICE Clinical Guideline (February 2011)Antenatal care; NICE guidance (August 2021)Schutze M, Boeing H, Pischon T, et al; Alcohol attributable burden of incidence of cancer in eight European countries based on results from prospective cohort study. BMJ. 2011 Apr 7342:d1584. doi: 10.1136/bmj.d1584.Guidelines on alcohol consumption; House of Commons Library, UK Parliament, June 2016Try Dry: the app to track your progress during Dry Jan and beyond; Alcohol Change UKNo level of alcohol consumption is safe for our health; World Health Organization, 2023Related InformationAlcoholism and Alcohol Dependence (Management) ProEffects of Alcohol Abuse ProAlcoholism and Alcohol Misuse - Recognition and Assessment ProAlcohol Withdrawal and Alcohol Detoxification Alcohol and Sensible Drinking - Safe Limits of Alcohol   What are the risks of alcohol as you get older?    4 minutes reading time  31-Jan-24  Why does drinking alcohol affect your sleep?    4 minutes reading time  17-Jan-24  How to drink sensibly over the festive season    7 minutes reading time  12-Dec-19  The best way to get rid of a hangover    5 minutes reading time  15-Dec-23  Hi thereI'm Veronica and have been on antabuse for 8 weeks and still trying really really hard to stay off alcohol..I did my hair dye just before using meds but I now need to seriously do my hair.....   VeronicanewmeJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Doug McKechnie, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Document ID  4679 (v48)  Last updated on   24 February 2023 Next review date  06 January 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Alcohol and Sensible Drinking - Safe Limits of AlcoholNext article Alcohol Withdrawal Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Alcoholism and Problem Drinking     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/healthy-living/alcohol-and-liver-disease/alcoholism-and-problem-drinkingCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


