# Alcohol Withdrawal (syndrome) and Alcohol Detoxification | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Healthy Living    Liver Disease and Alcohol (Effects of Alcohol Abuse)  Alcohol Withdrawal and Alcohol Detoxification Last updated by Dr Laurence Knott   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy  Last updated 13 Apr 2021   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Liver Disease and Alcohol (Effects of Alcohol Abuse)      Alcohol and Sensible Drinking - Safe Limits of Alcohol      Alcoholism and Problem Drinking      Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease      Dealing with Poisoning In this series     Liver Disease and Alcohol (Effects of Alcohol Abuse)      Alcohol and Sensible Drinking - Safe Limits of Alcohol      Alcoholism and Problem Drinking      Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease      Dealing with Poisoning Many people who regularly drink excessive quantities of alcohol become alcohol-dependent. This can cause the body serious harm. There is a great deal of help for people who are alcohol-dependent and want to stop drinking.In this article   Alcohol withdrawal syndrome   What is an alcohol detox?   What helps alcohol withdrawal?   How will I feel going through 'detox'?   Vitamin supplements   Detoxification in hospital   After a detox - staying off alcohol   Other help In This Article     Alcohol Withdrawal and Alcohol DetoxificationIn this article Alcohol withdrawal syndrome  What is an alcohol detox?  What helps alcohol withdrawal?  How will I feel going through 'detox'?  Vitamin supplements  Detoxification in hospital  After a detox - staying off alcohol  Other help If you are alcohol-dependent you have a strong desire to drink alcohol. In addition, your body becomes used to lots of alcohol. Therefore, you may start to develop withdrawal symptoms 3-8 hours after your last drink as the effect of the alcohol wears off. So, even if you want to stop drinking, it is often difficult because of the alcohol withdrawal symptoms.Detoxification, or 'detox', is an option if you are alcohol-dependent.Alcohol withdrawal syndromeFeeling sick (nausea).The 'shakes' (trembling).Sweating.Craving for alcohol and just feeling awful.Convulsions - these occur in a small number of cases.As a result, you drink alcohol regularly and depend on it to prevent these symptoms. If you do not have any more alcohol the withdrawal symptoms usually last 5-7 days but a craving for alcohol may continue for long-term.Delirium tremensDelirium tremens (DTs) is a more severe reaction after stopping alcohol. It occurs in about 1 in 20 people who have alcohol withdrawal symptoms, about 48- 72 hours after their last drink. Symptoms include: marked trembling and agitation, confusion and seeing and hearing things that are not there (delirium). Some people have convulsions. Complications can develop, such as lack of fluid in the body (dehydration) and other serious physical problems. It is fatal in some cases.What is an alcohol detox?Detoxification, or 'detox', involves taking a short course of a medicine which helps to prevent withdrawal symptoms when you stop drinking alcohol. The most commonly used medicine for 'detox' is chlordiazepoxide. This is a benzodiazepine medicine. Other possible medication that can be considered includes diazepam and the antipsychotic medicines olanzapine and haloperidol, although antipsychotics should only be used in addition with benzodiazepines and not by themselves alone in the treatment of severe alcohol withdrawal symptoms.What helps alcohol withdrawal?Some GPs (who have been specially trained) are happy to prescribe for an 'alcohol detox'. Otherwise your community alcohol team will assist. A common plan is as follows:A GP will prescribe a high dose of medication for the first day that you stop drinking alcohol.You then gradually reduce the dose over the following 5-7 days. This usually prevents or greatly reduces the unpleasant alcohol withdrawal symptoms.You must agree not to drink any alcohol when you are going through 'detox'. A breathalyser may be used to confirm that you are not drinking.Whoever is supporting you will usually see you quite often during the time of 'detox'.Also during this period, support from family or friends can be of great help. Often the responsibility for getting the prescription and giving the 'detox' medicine is shared with a family member or friend. For example, a partner or parent of the person going through 'detox'.Ready to hit your weight loss goals?Find a range of services to suit you, from medication through to managed programs Book now How will I feel going through 'detox'?Some people manage quite easily, whilst others find it more difficult. You can expect to:Feel quite nervous or anxious for a few days.Have some difficulty with getting off to sleep for a few nights.Have some mild withdrawal symptoms but they should not be too bad and a lot less than if you were not taking the 'detox' medicine.The medication used for 'detox' does not make you stop drinking. You need determination to stop. The medication simply helps you to feel better whilst your body readjusts to not having alcohol. Even after the period of 'detox' you may still have some craving for alcohol. So you will still need willpower and coping strategies for when you feel tempted to drink.Vitamin supplementsYou are likely to be prescribed vitamins, particularly vitamin B1 (thiamine), if you are alcohol-dependent - especially during 'detox'. This is because many people who are dependent on alcohol do not eat properly and can lack certain vitamins. A lack of vitamin B1 is the most common. A lack of this vitamin can cause serious brain conditions.Detoxification in hospitalSome people are referred to a specialist drug and alcohol unit for 'detox'. This is usually better for people who have other physical or mental health problems and for those who have the following:Little home or social support.A history of severe withdrawal symptoms.A physical illness caused by alcohol.Previous attempts to stop alcohol which have failed.The medicines used to 'detox' in specialist units are much the same as GPs prescribe. However, these units have more staff and expertise for giving support and counselling.You may be admitted to hospital if you have serious alcohol-related problems such as DTs or withdrawal seizures, or if you are aged under 16 years and have alcohol withdrawal symptoms.Other groups of people sometimes offered hospital admission for 'detox' include those with learning difficulties, social difficulties or lots of different illnesses.After a detox - staying off alcoholAfter a successful alcohol 'detox', some people go back to drinking heavily again at some point (a relapse). To help to prevent a relapse you may be offered medication or other help.MedicationYou may be advised to take a medicine for several months to help you keep off alcohol.Acamprosate is a medicine which helps to ease alcohol cravings. It is usually started in hospital and continued by GPs.Disulfiram is another medicine which is sometimes recommended by hospital specialists following a successful 'detox'. When you take disulfiram you get very unpleasant symptoms if you drink any alcohol. These may include:Flushing.Being sick (vomiting).A 'thumping' heart (palpitations).Headache.So, in effect, the medicine acts as a deterrent for when you are tempted to drink. It can help some people to stay off alcohol.Naltrexone is an alternative to acamprosate but it is usually only prescribed by specialists.Nalmefene is a newer treatment available as an option for reducing alcohol consumption in people with alcohol dependence or alcohol addiction:It is considered for those who have an alcohol consumption of more than 60 g per day for men and more than 40 g per day for women (8 g of alcohol is equal to one standard unit of alcohol), without physical withdrawal symptoms and who do not require immediate detoxification.Nalmefene is another treatment often started by a specialist rather than a GP. Patients who are prescribed it should be regularly reviewed by a healthcare professional whilst taking it.Other helpIt is thought that you are less likely to go back to drinking heavily if you have counselling, or other support to help you to stay off alcohol. Your doctor, practice nurse, or local drug and alcohol unit may provide ongoing support when you are trying to stay off alcohol. Self-help groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous have also helped many people to stay off alcohol.If you do go back to heavy drinking, you can always try again to stop or cut down. Some people take several attempts before they stop drinking, or keep within the safe limits, for good. See the separate leaflet called Alcohol and Sensible Drinking.Previous article   Alcoholism and Problem Drinking Next article  Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Alcohol-use disorders: diagnosis, assessment and management of harmful drinking and alcohol dependence; NICE Clinical Guideline (February 2011)Sachdeva A, Choudhary M, Chandra M; Alcohol Withdrawal Syndrome: Benzodiazepines and Beyond. J Clin Diagn Res. 2015 Sep9(9):VE01-VE07. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2015/13407.6538. Epub 2015 Sep 1.Drugs and Alcohol; Public Health EnglandAlcohol and pregnancy: Patient Information Leaflet. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, 2018Alcohol - problem drinking; NICE CKS, November 2022 (UK access only)Related InformationAlcohol and Sensible Drinking - Safe Limits of AlcoholAlcoholism and Problem DrinkingLiver Disease and Alcohol (Effects of Alcohol Abuse)Drug Dependence TreatmentDealing with Poisoning   What are the risks of alcohol as you get older?    4 minutes reading time  31-Jan-24  Why does drinking alcohol affect your sleep?    4 minutes reading time  17-Jan-24  How to tell if a drink has been spiked    5 minutes reading time  11-Nov-21  Is going sober becoming a trend?    6 minutes reading time  22-Jan-20  Hi thereI'm Veronica and have been on antabuse for 8 weeks and still trying really really hard to stay off alcohol..I did my hair dye just before using meds but I now need to seriously do my hair.....   VeronicanewmeJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Laurence Knott Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy Document ID  4802 (v46)  Last updated on   13 April 2021 Next review date  12 April 2026 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Alcoholism and Problem DrinkingNext article Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Alcohol Withdrawal (syndrome) and Alcohol Detoxification     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/healthy-living/alcohol-and-liver-disease/alcohol-withdrawal-and-detox-alcohol-detoxificationCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


