# Aminosalicylates: Types and Side-Effects | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Digestive Health    Inflammatory Bowel Disease  Aminosalicylates Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy  Last updated 16 Mar 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Inflammatory Bowel Disease      Crohn's Disease      Ulcerative Colitis      Stoma Dietary Care In this series     Inflammatory Bowel Disease      Crohn's Disease      Ulcerative Colitis      Stoma Dietary Care Aminosalicylates are a group of medicines used to treat inflammation of the gut that are used to treat and prevent flare-ups of ulcerative colitis.In this article   What are aminosalicylates?   How do aminosalicylates work?   Are there different types of aminosalicylates?   Which is the best one?   Can I buy aminosalicylates or are they just on prescription?   How do I take aminosalicylates?   How quickly do aminosalicylates work?   How long is treatment needed?   Who cannot take aminosalicylates?   Aminosalicylate side-effects   Other considerations In This Article     AminosalicylatesIn this article What are aminosalicylates?  How do aminosalicylates work?  Are there different types of aminosalicylates?  Which is the best one?  Can I buy aminosalicylates or are they just on prescription?  How do I take aminosalicylates?  How quickly do aminosalicylates work?  How long is treatment needed?  Who cannot take aminosalicylates?  Aminosalicylate side-effects  Other considerations What are aminosalicylates?Aminosalicylates are a group of medicines that can help to control the symptoms of some inflammatory bowel (gut) diseases, and treat ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease. See the separate leaflets called Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Ulcerative Colitis and Crohn's Disease.They include balsalazide, mesalazine, olsalazine and sulfasalazine, and come in various different brand names. They also come in a variety of different forms:Tablets or liquid to be taken by mouth.Liquid or foam enemas.Suppositories to be inserted into the back passage (rectum).The type of aminosalicylate that you are prescribed (for example, tablet or enema) depends upon where the inflammation is in your gut.Aminosalicylates are mainly used:To help keep people with ulcerative colitis in remission. That is, to keep symptoms away and prevent flare-ups.To treat flare-ups of ulcerative colitis.Aminosalicylates are sometimes used to treat flare-ups of Crohn's disease. But it is not common to use them for this, as most experts now think that they are not as effective as other treatments for Crohn's disease.There is also some evidence that if you have ulcerative colitis then taking an aminosalicylate on a long-term basis can significantly reduce your risk of developing bowel cancer.Aminosalicylates are also used to treat some forms of arthritis. However, the rest of this leaflet is mainly about their use in inflammatory bowel diseases, in particular ulcerative colitis.How do aminosalicylates work?The precise way these medicines work is not fully understood. It is thought they work on the cells lining the gut to change the way the cells release certain chemicals including cytokines. These chemicals can contribute to making the gut inflamed, and may be a factor in causing the symptoms of inflammatory bowel diseases.Are aminosalicylates immunosuppressants?Aminosalicylates are medicines that help to reduce inflammation. Inflammation helps damaged tissue to heal. However prolonged or excessive inflammation can cause bad effects such as pain, swelling, bruising or redness, and can cause damage to parts of the body in different health conditions, such as the bowel in Crohn's disease.Aminosalicylates do not affect the body's defence (immune) system and so are not immunosuppressants.Are there different types of aminosalicylates?There are quite a few available. The one that is best for you will depend upon where the inflammation is in your gut. All aminosalicylate medicines contain the active ingredient called 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA). However:MesalazineMesalazine comes in six different brand names: Asacol®, Ipocol®, Octasa®, Mezavant®, Pentasa®, Salofalk®. The way the manufacturers make each of these is a little different:Asacol®, Ipocol®, Mesren® and Salofalk® each have a special coating which dissolves to release the active ingredient (5-ASA) at a certain pH (acidity) within the gut.Each Pentasa® tablet is made up of tiny granules and the active ingredient is gradually released over the length of the gut.Mezavant® tablets have a special hard centre that contains 5-ASA and they have a special coating.This means they release 5-ASA all along the colon (large intestine).Olsalazine and balsalazideThese have a special chemical bond in the formulation, which bonds the active ingredient. The bond is broken to release the active ingredient by the natural germs (bacteria) that live in the colon.Sulfasalazine (Salazopyrin®)This has an additional molecule attached called sulfapyridine. Some people may not be able to take medicines with sulfapyridine included - see below for details.The small differences in how these medicines are made, and how you take (or use) them, can be important because inflammatory bowel conditions can affect different parts of the gut. To treat your symptoms effectively, your doctor may prescribe a particular form of medication. For example:If your condition affects the back passage (rectum) only, you may be prescribed an aminosalicylate suppository or enema.If your gut is affected higher up, you may be prescribed an aminosalicylate tablet:Mezavant®, Dipentum® and Colazide® target the colon.Asacol®, Ipocol®, Mesren® and Salofalk® work a little higher in the gut in the last part of the small intestine (called the ileum).Pentasa® is designed to work along the entire length of the gut.Which is the best one?In general, medical studies show that aminosalicylates are probably equally effective. However, the evidence also suggests that sulfasalazine may cause more side-effects than the other types of aminosalicylates. Also, the one chosen may depend on the site and extent of your disease in the gut.Want to see a dietician?Book a private assessment with a qualified dietician today. Book now Can I buy aminosalicylates or are they just on prescription?These medicines are prescription-only and are usually prescribed by a specialist doctor.How do I take aminosalicylates?These medicines come in a variety of forms as mentioned above. Your doctor will advise you on how to take your medication, including how often. However, in general, the tablets or capsules should always be swallowed whole and not chewed. Read the leaflet that comes with your particular brand for detailed information.You will usually need special monitoring for the first three months of your treatment, with checks every three months after that. This involves a blood test before you start taking the medication to see how well your liver and kidneys are functioning. Your liver function will then be checked every three months while you are taking the medicines.If you take aminosalicylates for more than a year and you have no problems then you usually only need to have blood tests every six months.You may also be encouraged to keep a record of the frequency of your bowel movements to check how well the medication is working.How quickly do aminosalicylates work?Aminosalicylates may work quickly - within a week or so - to deal with symptoms that come on suddenly. In other cases they may be used continually to help to keep symptoms away and prevent flare-ups.How long is treatment needed?This can vary depending on the reason for treating you. In some people these medicines are used to treat flare-ups. In others they may be used for a long time to keep symptoms away. You should talk to your doctor for advice on thisWho cannot take aminosalicylates?Aminosalicylates may not be suitable for people with certain liver or kidney problems or for pregnant or breastfeeding women. People with a known allergic reaction to salicylates, such as aspirin, should not take these medicines. You should also inform your doctor if you have a sensitivity to sulfonamide, a chemical used in some diuretics and anti-inflammatory medicines.A full list of people who should not take aminosalicylates is included with the information leaflet that comes in the medication packet. If you are prescribed an aminosalicylate, read this to be sure you are safe to take it.Aminosalicylate side-effectsThe most common side-effects when taking aminosalicylates are: Diarrhoea.Headache.Feeling sick (nausea).Rash.The side-effects most commonly experienced are minor and are generally not serious. However very rarely they can cause problems with your blood. You should discuss this with your doctor immediately if you have any unexplained bleeding, bruising, red or purple discolouration of the skin, sore throat, or a high temperature (fever), or if you feel generally unwell during treatment. Most people who take aminosalicylates do not have any serious side-effects.Note: a rare but serious side-effect is an effect on the blood-making cells. If this occurs it can greatly reduce the number of blood cells in your body, including the cells that fight off infection and those that help to stop bleeding. Therefore, if you develop a sore throat, mouth ulcers, unexplained bruising or bleeding, rash, high temperature (fever) or any other signs of infection, stop the medicine and report this to your doctor immediately.(As noted above, a mild rash is a common side-effect. The rash associated with this rare but serious effect on blood-making cells is different. Therefore, when taking these medicines always report a rash to a doctor who can then decide if it is a common and minor problem or the more serious rash.)There are other rare side-effects. For example, in rare cases, some people taking aminosalicylates may have a hypersensitivity reaction. This may make you feel itchy, become more sensitive to sunlight or cause skin peeling. Sulfasalazine can cause a reduced sperm count in some men. This is reversible and sperm counts return to normal 2-3 months after stopping treatment.For a full list of all possible side-effects and interactions associated with your medicine, read the leaflet that comes with your medication.Other considerationsSulfasalazine may change the colour of your urine and tears, making these fluids slightly orange. This can stain soft contact lenses in some people. If you wear contact lenses and need to take sulfasalazine it is usually recommended that you use glasses instead.How to use the Yellow Card SchemeIf you think you have had a side-effect to one of your medicines you can report this on the Yellow Card Scheme. You can do this online at www.mhra.gov.uk/yellowcard.The Yellow Card Scheme is used to make pharmacists, doctors and nurses aware of any new side-effects that medicines or any other healthcare products may have caused. If you wish to report a side-effect, you will need to provide basic information about:The side-effect.The name of the medicine which you think caused it.The person who had the side-effect.Your contact details as the reporter of the side-effect.It is helpful if you have your medication - and/or the leaflet that came with it - with you while you fill out the report.Previous article   Ulcerative Colitis Next article  Stoma Dietary Care  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Crohn’s disease: management; NICE Guidance (May 2019)Ulcerative colitis: management; NICE Guidance (May 2019)Colonoscopic surveillance for prevention of colorectal cancer in people with ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease or adenomas; NICE Clinical Guideline (March 2011 - last updated September 2022)Crohn's disease; NICE CKS, August 2020 (UK access only)Ulcerative colitis; NICE CKS, April 2020 (UK access only)Ferrari L, Krane MK, Fichera A; Inflammatory bowel disease surgery in the biologic era. World J Gastrointest Surg. 2016 May 278(5):363-70. doi: 10.4240/wjgs.v8.i5.363.United Ostomy Associations of America IncRelated InformationUlcerative ColitisCrohn's DiseaseBowel Cancer ScreeningColonoscopyOral Steroids  Crohn's disease in children: How to support your child     8 minutes reading time  17-May-23  What causes Crohn's disease?    9 minutes reading time  31-Mar-23  What are the symptoms of Crohn's disease?    10 minutes reading time  30-Mar-23  What is the best diet for Crohn's disease?     6 minutes reading time  09-Mar-23 Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy Document ID  9157 (v5)  Last updated on   16 March 2023 Next review date  07 February 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Ulcerative ColitisNext article Stoma Dietary Care Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Aminosalicylates: Types and Side-Effects     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/digestive-health/inflammatory-bowel-disease/aminosalicylatesCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up

