# Antispasmodics: Uses and Side-Effects | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Digestive Health    Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)  Antispasmodics Last updated by Dr Caroline Wiggins   Peer reviewed by Dr Surangi Mendis  Last updated 31 Oct 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)      Trapped Wind, Gas and Bloating      Bile Acid Diarrhoea      Probiotics and Prebiotics In this series     Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)      Trapped Wind, Gas and Bloating      Bile Acid Diarrhoea      Probiotics and Prebiotics Antispasmodics are used to treat symptoms such as tummy pain and cramp (spasm). They are most often used for symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. The side-effects that may occur are usually minor.In this article   What are antispasmodics?   How do antispasmodics work?   Which conditions are antispasmodics used to treat?   How do I take antispasmodics?   How quickly do antispasmodics work?   How long is treatment needed for?   Who cannot take antispasmodics?   What are the side-effects of antispasmodics?   Other considerations   Can I buy antispasmodics? In This Article     AntispasmodicsIn this article What are antispasmodics?  How do antispasmodics work?  Which conditions are antispasmodics used to treat?  How do I take antispasmodics?  How quickly do antispasmodics work?  How long is treatment needed for?  Who cannot take antispasmodics?  What are the side-effects of antispasmodics?  Other considerations  Can I buy antispasmodics? What are antispasmodics?Antispasmodics are a group (class) of medicines that can help to control some symptoms that arise from the gut (intestines) - in particular, gut spasm.There are two main types, as follows.Antimuscarinics such as:Dicycloverine.Hyoscine.Atropine.Propantheline.Smooth muscle relaxants such as:Alverine.Mebeverine.Peppermint oil.How do antispasmodics work?The movement of food along your gut (intestines) happens because some of the muscles in the gut tense (contract) and then relax in a regular pattern throughout the length of the gut. These muscle contractions are brought about by various chemicals produced by your body which stick to special 'docking' sites (receptors) on the muscles.However, in conditions such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) these muscle contractions can occur too often or be painful, causing symptoms such as pain and bloating.Antimuscarinics work by attaching to the receptors and in this way stop the chemicals from 'docking' there. This stops or reduces the muscle contractions which can help to relieve some of the symptoms caused by IBS.Because muscarinic receptors are also found in other parts of the body, taking an antimuscarinic can have other effects. For example, muscarinic receptors also help to control the production of saliva in the mouth. Taking a medicine that blocks these receptors may cause a dry mouth.Smooth muscle relaxants work directly on the smooth muscle in the wall of the gut. Here they help to relax the muscle and relieve the pain associated with a contraction of the gut.Which conditions are antispasmodics used to treat?Antispasmodics are commonly used in IBS:To help relieve some of the symptoms of IBS such as spasm (colic), bloating and tummy (abdominal) pain.To reduce the movement (motility) of the gut (intestines).Note: not everybody with IBS finds that antispasmodics work well. However, they are worth trying, as they work well in a good number of cases.Antispasmodics are also used in some other conditions such as diverticular disease.Want to see a dietician?Book a private assessment with a qualified dietician today. Book now How do I take antispasmodics?Your doctor will advise you how to take your medication, including how often. You may be encouraged to use the medicine at a particular time in relation to eating. Some people take a dose before meals if pains tend to develop after eating.It is generally recommended that you take these medicines only when necessary. For example, people with IBS commonly find that there are times when symptoms flare up for a while. So, it is common to take an antispasmodic when symptoms flare up, and to stop them if symptoms settle down.Note: pains may ease with medication but may not go away completely.How quickly do antispasmodics work?Antispasmodics usually work within an hour or so to ease symptoms.How long is treatment needed for?These medicines are usually only used when you have active symptoms. However, this can vary depending on the reason for treating you. Your doctor should be able to advise you on this.Who cannot take antispasmodics?Most people can take antispasmodics. There are a few exceptions. A full list of people who should not take antispasmodics is included with the information leaflet that comes with the medicine packet.If you are prescribed antispasmodics, read the included information leaflet to be sure you are safe to take them. In particular, antispasmodics may not be suitable for people with:Paralytic ileus - a condition where the gut (intestinal) muscles are paralysed.A blocked gut (intestinal obstruction).Myasthenia gravis - a condition causing muscle weakness.Pyloric stenosis - narrowing of the outlet from the stomach.Prostate gland enlargement.Pregnant or breastfeeding mothers should seek advice before using these medicines. Avoiding these medicines if possible is usually recommended if you are pregnant.What are the side-effects of antispasmodics?Most people who take antispasmodics do not have any serious side-effects. If side-effects occur, they are usually minor. In general, the smooth muscle-relaxant medicines have fewer side-effects. The side-effects depend on which of the antispasmodic medicines you are taking. Some of the more common side-effects are:Heartburn.Constipation.Dry mouth.Difficulty passing urine.Note: the above is not the full list of side-effects for these medicines. Please see the information leaflet that comes with your medicine for a full list of possible side-effects and cautions.These medicines sometimes react with other medicines that you may take. Ensure your pharmacist and doctor knows of any other medicines that you are taking, including ones that you have bought rather than been prescribed.Other considerationsIf you have IBS you may become used to having gut (intestinal) symptoms. However, do not assume all gut symptoms are due to your IBS. You should consult your doctor if you experience any change in the usual pattern of your symptoms. In particular, the following problems can indicate a serious gut disorder:Unintentional weight loss.Bleeding from the back passage (rectum).Blood in your stools (faeces) - this may colour your stools black.A change in your bowel habit lasting 4 weeks or more, particularly to looser stools, or passing stool more frequently than usual.Bloating that does not fully resolve or is getting worse.Can I buy antispasmodics?You can buy some antispasmodics from your pharmacist. Others are only available with a prescription.How to use the Yellow Card SchemeIf you think you have had a side-effect to one of your medicines you can report this on the Yellow Card Scheme. You can do this online at www.mhra.gov.uk/yellowcard.The Yellow Card Scheme is used to make pharmacists, doctors and nurses aware of any new side-effects that medicines or any other healthcare products may have caused. If you wish to report a side-effect, you will need to provide basic information about:The side-effect.The name of the medicine which you think caused it.The person who had the side-effect.Your contact details as the reporter of the side-effect.It is helpful if you have your medication - and/or the leaflet that came with it - with you while you fill out the report.Previous article   Bile Acid Diarrhoea Next article  Probiotics and Prebiotics  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Irritable bowel syndrome in adults: diagnosis and management of irritable bowel syndrome in primary care; NICE Clinical Guideline (February 2008, updated April 2017)Irritable bowel syndrome; NICE CKS, August 2023 (UK access only)BNF - antispasmodicsRelated InformationIrritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) ProPeppermint oil capsules (Colpermin, Mintec)Alverine capsules (Audmonal, Spasmonal)Dicycloverine  Probiotics for IBS: do they work?    8 minutes reading time  14-Feb-24  Hypnotherapy for IBS: the gut-brain axis     6 minutes reading time  26-Jan-24  Are the symptoms of IBS in men and women different?     7 minutes reading time  12-Apr-23  How does IBS affect people at work?    8 minutes reading time  12-Oct-21  Hello everyone, If you've seen my previous discussion from last year, you will know I was having problems with undigested food, strands of fibre and these yellow balls in my stool. After eliminating...   randomuser333Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Caroline Wiggins Peer reviewed by  Dr Surangi Mendis Document ID  9154 (v6)  Last updated on   31 October 2023 Next review date  29 October 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Bile Acid DiarrhoeaNext article Probiotics and Prebiotics Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Antispasmodics: Uses and Side-Effects     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/digestive-health/irritable-bowel-syndrome-leaflet/antispasmodic-medicinesCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up

