# Anxiety: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatments | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Mental Health  Anxiety Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Krishna Vakharia, MRCGP  Last updated 19 May 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Social Anxiety Disorder      Panic Attacks and Panic Disorder      Generalised Anxiety Disorder In this series     Social Anxiety Disorder      Panic Attacks and Panic Disorder      Generalised Anxiety Disorder Most people feel anxious from time to time. However, anxiety can become abnormal if it interferes with your day-to-day activities. Anxiety is a symptom of various anxiety disorders. They can often be treated. Treatments include various talking treatments and medication.In this article   What is anxiety?   Anxiety symptoms   What causes anxiety?   Is anxiety normal?   Risk factors   What are anxiety disorders?   Anxiety treatment   Alcohol and anxiety   When to see a doctor for anxiety In This Article     AnxietyIn this article What is anxiety?  Anxiety symptoms  What causes anxiety?  Is anxiety normal?  Risk factors  What are anxiety disorders?  Anxiety treatment  Alcohol and anxiety  When to see a doctor for anxiety What is anxiety?Anxiety is a natural response to feeling afraid or threatened. Anxiety can become a problem if we start worrying excessively about relatively harmless situations. When our anxiety feels intense or overwhelming, it starts to interfere with our daily life.What is anxiety?Prof Swaran Singh, FRCPsychWhen you are anxious you feel fearful and tense. In addition you may also have one or more unpleasant mental or physical symptoms.Anxiety symptomsPhysical symptoms of anxiety include:The sensation of having a 'thumping heart' (palpitations).A feeling of sickness (nausea).Shaking (tremor).Sweating.Dry mouth.Chest pain.Headaches.Fast breathing.Dizziness.The physical symptoms are partly caused by the brain which sends lots of messages down nerves to various parts of the body when you are anxious. When you are anxious you release stress hormones, such as adrenaline (epinephrine), into the bloodstream. These act on the heart, muscles and other parts of the body to cause symptoms, such as a thumping heartbeat and sweaty palms.Mental symptoms of anxiety include:Feeling tired.Feeling restless or irritable.Unable to concentrate or make decisions.Difficulty sleeping.Worrying about the past or thinking something bad will happen.Behavioural symptoms of anxiety include:Sometimes there is a feeling of a need to be alone and avoiding friends and social situations.Selective mutism is when a child is unable to speak in certain situations, such as when at school, even when they can speak in other situations, such as at home with close family members.Compulsions may develop to get rid of negative, anxiety producing thoughts, such as compulsively washing hands because of a fear of germs.Sometimes anxiety can cause agoraphobia, ie a fear of leaving your home because of anxiety about what might happen if you leave your house.Unhealthy coping tools, such as alcohol misuse or substance abuse, which may initially dull the symptoms of anxiety but make the anxiety worse. Our picks for Anxiety How to spot the symptoms of social anxietySocial anxiety usually starts in your teenage years but can be triggered at any stage of life. I...   9min  How to spot the symptoms of social anxiety   9min  Sunday scaries: How to beat Sunday night anxiety   6min  How to stop ‘mum guilt’ from impacting your mental health   5min  Does the moon really affect us?   8minWhat causes anxiety?Some people may be more prone to anxiety because of their genetics and there may be a chemical imbalance in the brain which makes them feel much more anxious.Difficult past experiences in childhood, adolescence or adulthood are a common trigger for anxiety problems.Current stressful life events/trauma can also trigger anxiety.Anxiety can sometimes be a medication side effect, such as some psychiatric medications, or due to using recreational drugs or alcohol.Anxiety may also be a symptom of other illness, particularly hyperthyroidism.Is anxiety normal?Feelings of anxiety are normal in stressful situations and can even be helpful. For example, most people will be anxious when threatened by an aggressive person, or before an important race. The burst of adrenaline (epinephrine) and nerve impulses which we have in response to stressful situations can encourage a 'fight or flight' response.Anxiety is abnormal and can be classed as a mental health condition if it:Is out of proportion to the stressful situation; orPersists when a stressful situation has gone, or the stress is minor; orAppears for no apparent reason when there is no stressful situation.Looking for a counsellor?Video appointments with qualified counsellors are now available in Patient Access Book now Risk factorsThere are a number of risk factors for anxiety, which include:Females are more often affected than males.Family history of anxiety, depression, or other psychiatric disorders.Childhood abuse or neglect, or parental mental health problems.Being a victim of bullying as a child.Sudden bereavement.Being separated, widowed, divorced.Being unemployed.Substance dependence or exposure to organic solvents.Chronic health conditions, eg, heart disease, cancer, respiratory disease, diabetes, or arthritis.What are anxiety disorders?You may have an anxiety disorder if anxiety symptoms interfere with your normal day-to-day activities, or if worry about developing anxiety symptoms affects your life. It is thought that about 1 in 20 people have an anxiety disorder at any one time.There are various conditions (disorders) where anxiety is a main symptom. Some people have features of more than one type of disorder at the same time.See the links below for more information on some of the main types of anxiety disorders:Social anxiety disorder.Panic attack and panic disorder.Generalised anxiety disorder.Acute stress reaction.Post-traumatic stress disorder.Phobias - eg, agoraphobia and other specific phobias.Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).Adjustment reaction is similar to an acute stress reaction but symptoms develop days or weeks after a stressful situation such as a divorce or house move. It is called an 'adjustment reaction' because it is caused by a reaction or adjustment to the problem. Symptoms are similar to acute reaction to stress but may include depression. The symptoms tend to improve over a few weeks or so.Anxiety treatmentThe main aim of anxiety treatment is to help you to reduce symptoms so that anxiety no longer affects your day-to-day life.The treatment options depend on what condition you have and how severely you are affected. They may include one or more of the following:NON-MEDICATION TREATMENTSUnderstandingUnderstanding the cause of symptoms and talking things over with a friend, family member or health professional may help. In particular, some people worry that the physical symptoms of anxiety, such as a 'thumping heart' are due to a physical illness - 'a heart problem'. This can make anxiety worse. Understanding that you have an anxiety disorder is unlikely to cure your symptoms but it often helps.CounsellingThis may help some people with certain conditions. For example, counselling which focuses on problem-solving skills may help if you have generalised anxiety disorder (GAD).Anxiety management coursesThese may be an option for some conditions, if courses are available in your area. The courses may include: learning how to relax, problem-solving skills, coping strategies and group support.Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) for anxietyThis therapy, if available in your area, can work well for persisting anxiety disorders and phobias:CBT is a type of therapy that deals with your current thought processes and/or behaviours and aims to change them, which may help you to manage your anxiety. See the separate leaflet called Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT).Self-helpThere are various national groups which can help by giving information, advice and support. They, or your doctor or practice nurse, may also be able to put you in touch with a local support group for face-to-face support.You can also get leaflets, books, CDs, DVDs, MP3s, etc, on relaxation and combating stress. They teach simple deep-breathing techniques and other measures to relieve stress, help you to relax and possibly ease anxiety symptoms.MEDICATIONAntidepressant medicinesSelective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are the group of antidepressants commonly used as anti-anxiety medications.SSRIs often used for anxiety are:Escitalopram.Sertraline.These are commonly used to treat depression but also help to reduce the symptoms of anxiety even if you are not depressed. They work by interfering with brain chemicals (also called neurotransmitters) such as serotonin which may be involved in causing anxiety symptoms. Antidepressants are not tranquillisers and are not usually addictive.Other similar medications that can be used by your doctor to help manage anxiety are:Mirtazapine.Venlafaxine.Paroxetine. - this is now rarely prescribed by GPs.BenzodiazepinesBenzodiazepines such as diazepam used to be the most commonly prescribed anxiety treatment. They were known as the minor tranquilisers but they do have some serious known side-effects. They often work well to ease symptoms in the short term.The problem is they are addictive and can lose their effect if you take them for more than a few weeks. They may also make you drowsy. They are not used often for persistent anxiety conditions now.A short course of up to two weeks may be an option for anxiety which is very severe and short-term, or now and then to help you over a bad spell if you have persistent anxiety symptoms.BuspironeBuspirone is sometimes prescribed to treat GAD. It is an anti-anxiety medicine but different to the benzodiazepines and is not thought to be addictive. It is not clear how it works. It is thought to affect serotonin, a brain chemical which may be involved in causing anxiety symptoms.Beta-blocker medicinesA beta-blocker - for example, propranolol - can ease some of the physical symptoms such as trembling and a 'thumping heart' (palpitations). Beta-blocker medicines do not directly affect the mental symptoms such as worry.However, some people relax more easily if their physical symptoms are eased. These tend to work best in short-lived (acute) anxiety. For example, if you become more anxious before a test (eg, a driving test or an exam) then a beta-blocker may help to ease 'the shakes'.In some cases a combination of anxiety treatments such as cognitive therapy and an antidepressant may work better than either treatment alone.Alcohol and anxietyAlthough alcohol may ease symptoms in the short term, don't think that drinking helps to cure social anxiety. It does not.Drinking alcohol to 'calm nerves' can lead to problem drinking and may make problems with social anxiety and depression worse in the long term. See a doctor if you are drinking alcohol (or taking street drugs) to ease anxiety.When to see a doctor for anxietyYou should see a doctor if you're struggling to cope with anxiety, fear or panic, or if things you're trying yourself are not helping.You can also get free talking therapies like cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) on the NHS. You can refer yourself directly to an NHS talking therapies service without a referral from a GP (see 'Further Reading' below for the link. Next article  Social Anxiety Disorder  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Generalised anxiety disorder and panic disorder in adults: management; NICE Clinical Guideline (January 2011 - updated June 2020)Social anxiety disorder: recognition assessment and treatment; NICE Clinical Guideline (May 2013)Generalized anxiety disorder; NICE CKS, February 2023 (UK access only)Find an NHS talking therapies service.Related InformationPhobiasCognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT)Panic Disorder ProAgoraphobia ProSocial Anxiety Disorder Pro  How to spot the symptoms of social anxiety    9 minutes reading time  23-Feb-24  Sunday scaries: How to beat Sunday night anxiety    6 minutes reading time  21-Feb-24  How to cope with climate change anxiety    7 minutes reading time  06-Aug-19  How money worries can affect your health    6 minutes reading time  10-Jan-19  The last year of my life has been a brutal one. At the age of 22, I am in the lowest of lows and I desperately need some help!Here’s my tale:About a year ago, a couple months after an extremely...   TaylorMasonJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Krishna Vakharia, MRCGP Document ID  4659 (v45)  Last updated on   19 May 2023 Next review date  12 May 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Next article Social Anxiety Disorder Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Anxiety: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatments     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/mental-health/anxietyCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


