# Are new treatments for MS on the horizon? | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Multiple Sclerosis (MS)    Features  Added to  Saved itemsAre new treatments for MS on the horizon?        Save       Remove from Saved       Print      Share      Feedback130,000 people in the UK are living with multiple sclerosis (MS). Though there are treatments which can ease and help to manage symptoms, MS is a condition which has no cure. But now, a groundbreaking trial is trying to find new treatments which could revolutionise care for people with MS. Last updated by Ellie Broughton   Peer reviewed by Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE  Last updated 4 May 2021   Originally published 4 May 2021 6 mins readJacqueline Krarup, 54, was diagnosed with MS after experiencing double vision. Fifteen years before, she'd experienced numbness down one side on her body, but it passed. By the point of diagnosis, an MRI scan could show the disease's characteristic lesions on the brain.In 2016, Jacqueline's MS left the relapsing-remitting stage, and became what's known as 'secondary progressive'. Jacqueline is one of the 130,000 people in the UK living with MS.After that diagnosis, Jacqueline says, she remembers being hit with a huge appetite for knowledge and answers. "I wanted to find out as much as I could," she explains. "I'm sure everyone who has received a diagnosis like that wants to know as much as possible."This year, a brand new trial into treatments for progressive MS is launching in the UK, with the possibility that researchers might be ready to recruit participants before the end of 2021.How it worksThe trial is particularly groundbreaking for patients with neurodegenerative diseases because it takes its design from cancer research which is well known for safe and fast investigations into improving treatment for patients.The trial name, 'Octopus', reflects its multi-arm, multi-stage operation whereby researchers will test several treatments on different groups at the same time. Researchers will also be using drugs that are already safely and commonly used for other diseases.After a couple of years of the trial, researchers will observe the changes the trial treatment has or hasn't made to participants, using an MRI scan. Where a treatment demonstrates benefit, participants can stay on, and where it doesn't they can join a new arm of the trial in a kind of roll-on-roll-off process.Testing several treatments at onceThe trial is also a 'platform' design, like the one used to demonstrate the use of dexamethasone in treating severe COVID-19 (and the poor evidence for hydroxychloroquine). Results for Octopus won't be so fast, since fewer people face MS than COVID-19, but the example shows the use of these new clinical trials that evaluate several treatments at once. Octopus is being funded by the MS Society through its 'Stop MS' campaign, launched in 2019.Prof Jeremy Chataway is a consultant neurologist at University College London Hospital and co-lead on Octopus. During his career he has seen the options for MS patients explode from the basic offer thirty years ago of steroids for relapses, to twelve licensed treatments for relapsing-remitting MS.Prof Chataway is also working on a trial investigating whether simvastatin, a common drug that helps people keep their cholesterol down, could be re-purposed to protect MS patients' nervous systems. "There's no shortage of potential experimental laboratory medications, which could be useful in having an effect on progression, ie either slowing or stopping or ideally reversing," he says. "But what we have to do is go through a clinical trial programme." Our picks for Are new treatments for MS on the horizon? Early brain scans can predict MS prognosis Brain scans of people with early signs of multiple sclerosis can predict the long-term prognosis...   2min  Early brain scans can predict MS prognosis    2min  How MS can affect mental health    7min  Myths about MS you need to stop believing   5minRepair and careDr Emma Gray is the assistant director of research at the MS Society. Like Prof Chataway, she's familiar with the dozen treatments developed in the last two decades for patients with relapsing-remitting MS.But the new unmet need for MS patients, she says, is developing treatments for people with progressive MS. "We want to slow or stop the progression of MS," she says, "so that nobody with MS needs to worry about their condition getting worse."She explains that people with progressive MS have recently seen two new treatments (siponimod and ocrelizumab) to control the immune system, not just licensed for treatment but given draft/full approval respectively by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) for use for some people with MS on the NHS. But, she adds, this aspect of treatment is only one piece of the puzzle.Repairing damageAs well as treatments like these, progressive MS patients also need treatments that repair damage to the coating of their nerve cells (known as myelin) and improve the environment nerves cells live in ('neuroprotection').Although COVID-19 placed huge demands on MS patients to shield, and introduced some delays to the trial, remote monitoring has been much more widely adopted. Dr Gray predicts that this could cut some of the costs of research, and reduce some of the need for participants to travel for the trials, which is potentially tiring and stressful for people with progressive MS.Wider benefitsFurthermore, Octopus' findings about neuroprotection could later benefit patients with other neurodegenerative diseases (such as Parkinson's, or motor neurone disease)."When we're looking at treatments for remyelination - repairing myelin damage by the immune system - that's specific to MS," Dr Gray explains. "But when you look at this concept of neuroprotection - improving the environment the nerve cell finds itself in, promoting its survival and preventing nerves from dying - that's what neurodegeneration is and that's applicable to all neurodegenerative conditions."Keeping nerve cells alive, and repairing them is relevant to people with Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and motor neurone disease too. They are all struggling with neurodegeneration."Seeking MS patientsWhen the trial gets regulatory approval, and trial treatments get confirmed, researchers can begin recruiting participants. Because of COVID-19, timelines are uncertain, but it's possible that that could begin at the end of 2021.In the longer term, the MS Society's Stop MS Appeal plans to raise funds so that, by 2025, researchers will be in the final stages of testing treatment that slows or stops progressive MS.Jacqueline is now a member of the MS Society Research Network, and joined the patient and public forum that advises on Octopus.She is not sure whether the drugs trialled during Octopus will become available to her in time to help with her MS symptoms, but she hopes she is supporting work that will stop others going through what her generation of MS patients went through. Currently, MS is the most common disabling neurological disease of young adults in the UK."I think a lot about 'paying it forward'," she says. "My two children are now in their mid-20s and I hope they won't be affected by MS themselves."But the positivity I feel is that if there's an inkling of a first symptom, there are going to be treatments that can slow down the progression. I really think we will stop MS. If we can catch the progression at an early stage, that will be good enough."Read nextEarly brain scans can predict MS prognosis How MS can affect mental healthAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Related InformationFemale Sexual DysfunctionErectile Dysfunction (Impotence)Multiple SclerosisFingolimod capsules (Gilenya)Cannabis extract for muscle spasticity (Sativex)  Early brain scans can predict MS prognosis     2 minutes reading time  25-Jul-19  How MS can affect mental health     7 minutes reading time  27-Nov-18  Myths about MS you need to stop believing    5 minutes reading time  20-Apr-18  helloi have had a few repeat episodes of hand tingling which i believe has now progressed. i now havehand and arm painhand and arm tinglingtingling in my toeseye painmuscle twitcheshead tingling i...   Star586Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Read next Early brain scans can predict MS prognosis  Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Are new treatments for MS on the horizon?     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/news-and-features/are-new-treatments-for-ms-on-the-horizonCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


