# Arrhythmias: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Heart Health and Blood Vessels    Heart Palpitations (Bradycardia, Tachycardia)  Abnormal Heart Rhythms Arrhythmias Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy  Last updated 19 Nov 2022   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Heart Palpitations (Bradycardia, Tachycardia)      Bradycardia      Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome      Supraventricular Tachycardia (SVT) In this series     Heart Palpitations (Bradycardia, Tachycardia)      Bradycardia      Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome      Supraventricular Tachycardia (SVT) An arrhythmia is an abnormal rate and/or rhythm of the heartbeat due to some problem with the electrical conducting system of the heart.In this article   What is an arrhythmia?   What are the symptoms of arrhythmias?   What are the treatments for arrhythmias?   What are the different types of arrhythmias?   What causes an arrhythmia??   How do they test for arrhythmia? In This Article     Abnormal Heart RhythmsArrhythmiasIn this article What is an arrhythmia?  What are the symptoms of arrhythmias?  What are the treatments for arrhythmias?  What are the different types of arrhythmias?  What causes an arrhythmia??  How do they test for arrhythmia? What is an arrhythmia?An arrhythmia is an abnormal rate and/or rhythm of the heartbeat. There are various types but all are due to some problem with the electrical conducting system of the heart. Some arrhythmias are more serious than others. Some come and go (are intermittent); others are permanent unless treated.Tachycardia means a faster heart rate than usual - more than 100 beats per minute (bpm). This can be due to one of many different factors, such as exercise, fear, fever, anaemia or an overactive thyroid gland. Bradycardia means an irregular heartbeat which is slower than usual (fewer than 60 bpm).For more information about how the heart works, including the electrical system that regulates the heartbeat, see also Anatomy of the heart and blood vessels.What are the symptoms of arrhythmias?Symptoms can vary, depending on the severity of the condition. If the abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia) comes and goes (is intermittent), the symptoms develop suddenly and can go just as suddenly. Symptoms of arrhythmias include:The sensation of having a 'thumping heart' (palpitations). Note: sensations of palpitations are also common in people who do not have an arrhythmia. This is why it is important to see a doctor for correct diagnosis.An abnormally fast, slow, or irregular pulse.Dizziness or feeling faint.Shortness of breath.Chest pains which sometimes develop.Some arrhythmias are more serious than others. A heart rate that is very fast or very slow can result in too little blood flowing through the heart. In some cases this can lead to heart failure, or you may collapse.It can be very difficult to detect an arrhythmia in a young child, when the only clue may be a change in behaviour or a problem with feeding.What are the treatments for arrhythmias?Each type of abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia) has specific treatment options. Also, treating any underlying cause - such as coronary heart disease, or high blood pressure (hypertension) - may also be important in controlling certain arrhythmias. The sort of treatments which may be considered include:MedicationThe medication used will depend on the type of arrhythmia.Catheter destruction (ablation) treatmentA small wire (catheter) is passed via a large vein in your leg into the chambers of your heart. The tip of the catheter can destroy a tiny section of heart tissue that is the source or trigger of abnormal electrical impulses.CardioversionThis may be an option for some types of tachycardia. Whilst under anaesthetic, you are given an electrical shock over the heart to restore a normal regular heartbeat. This may revert the abnormal rhythm back to normal.Artificial pacemakersThese are used in cases of complete heart block and in certain other situations. An artificial pacemaker is a small device which is inserted just under the skin on the upper chest. The pacemaker can then stimulate the heart to maintain a regular normal heartbeat.Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs)They are small devices which are similar to pacemakers and are inserted under the skin in the upper chest. The device monitors the heartbeat. If it detects a change to an abnormal rhythm, the device can send a short electrical shock to the heart to stop the abnormal rhythm.What are the different types of arrhythmias?The main types of arrhythmia include the following:Ectopic beats: these are extra heartbeats which occur out of rhythm with the normal heartbeat. They are very common and are usually harmless. You do not normally notice them. Sometimes you may notice them as a slight thud in the chest if you are lying still in bed. Caffeine in tea or coffee, and alcohol may cause you to have more ectopic beats than usual.Supraventricular tachycardia.Atrial fibrillation (AF).Atrial flutter is similar to atrial fibrillation (AF). The atria contract at about 300 bpm but the ventricles are unable to beat that quickly and so beat at between 75 and 150 bpm.Ventricular tachycardia is an uncommon arrhythmia. The ventricles beat faster than normal (between 120 and 200 bpm). The rate in the atria is normal. There is a trigger of electrical impulses somewhere in the ventricles which overrides the normal impulses coming down from the atria.Ventricular fibrillation (VF): many random electrical impulses 'fire off' from different parts of the ventricles. This is called fibrillation. This means the heart muscles only weakly contract and this is not enough to push blood out of the heart. This is life-threatening and a common cause of the heart stopping (cardiac arrest). It is fatal unless corrected within a few minutes.Heart block occurs when the electrical impulses are partially or fully blocked between the atria and the ventricles. The SA node in the right atrium 'fires' at the normal rate but the rate at which the ventricles contract (pulse rate) depends on how many impulses get through to the ventricles:First-degree heart block means there is a slight delay in each impulse going from the atria to the ventricles. But, each impulse does get through and the resting heart rate is normal.Second-degree heart block means that some impulses from the atria are not conducted through to the ventricles. The rate that the ventricles contract can then be slow.Third-degree, or complete, heart block means that no impulses are conducted through. The ventricles then contract at their own in-built rate of about 20-40 bpm. So, you have a very slow pulse.Sick sinus syndrome: the heart's natural pacemaker (called the sinus node or sinoatrial node) - becomes damaged. The heart then tends to beat slowly or miss a few beats. But, in some cases, the heart alternates between beating slowly for a while and then fast for a while.What causes an arrhythmia??There are various causes of abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias). They include the following:Heart conditionsMany arrhythmias occur as a complication of a heart condition. For example:Coronary heart disease (which causes angina and heart attacks).Heart valve diseases.High blood pressure (hypertension).Ageing (age-related degeneration) around the conducting fibres may cause complete heart block.A disorder of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy). See the separate leaflets called Dilated Cardiomyopathy and Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.Congenital abnormalities in the electrical pathways. Congenital means the abnormality is present from birth.Non-heart causesCertain medicines and excess thyroid hormone (hyperthyroidism) can sometimes trigger an arrhythmia. In some cases the cause is not clear. For example, some cases of AF and SVT occur out of the blue in otherwise healthy hearts. A section of the conducting fibres just becomes faulty and can trigger fast impulses.Are arrhythmias dangerous?Whether an arrhythmia is dangerous depends on the type of arrhythmia you have and any underlying cause for the arrhythmia. The most dangerous arrhythmia is ventricular fibrillation.Any significant change in your heart rhythm may mean that your heart is not able to pump blood efficiently throughout your body and this may lead to heart failure. An arrhythmia may also cause a clot to form in your heart and the clot may flow to your brain to cause a stroke. However, most arrhythmias are not life-threatening and can be treated, such as with one or more medicines, or by catheter ablation. In catheter ablation, a thin tube (catheter) is inserted through a blood vessel to your heart. This allows abnormal tissue to be destroyed and proper function to your heart to be restored.How do they test for arrhythmia?Sometimes a doctor can easily diagnose that you have an abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia) by taking your pulse and examining you.Some people have dizzy spells, or fainting attacks which may be due to an intermittent arrhythmia. Tests can help to confirm if you have an arrhythmia and to find which type it is. The tests will include a heart tracing (electrocardiogram, or ECG).If you have an intermittent arrhythmia, this may not be detected by a standard ECG done at one particular time. You may then be advised to have an ambulatory ECG. This test records the electrical signals of your heart when you are walking about (ambulatory) and doing your normal activities.Sometimes an ECG is taken whilst you exercise on a treadmill or bike to try to provoke symptoms which may be an intermittent arrhythmia.Other more sophisticated tests may be advised.Previous article   Bradycardia Next article  Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Checking your pulse; British Heart FoundationGuasch E, Mont L; Diagnosis, pathophysiology, and management of exercise-induced arrhythmias. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2017 Feb14(2):88-101. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2016.173. Epub 2016 Nov 10.Voskoboinik A, Kalman JM, Kistler PM; Caffeine and Arrhythmias: Time to Grind the Data. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2018 Apr4(4):425-432. doi: 10.1016/j.jacep.2018.01.012.Safavi-Naeini P, Sorurbakhsh NZ, Razavi M; Cardiac Arrhythmias During Pregnancy. Tex Heart Inst J. 2021 Sep 148(4). pii: 472197. doi: 10.14503/THIJ-21-7548.Albert CM, Stevenson WG; The Future of Arrhythmias and Electrophysiology. Circulation. 2016 Jun 21133(25):2687-96. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.023519.Related InformationAblation Therapy for Arrhythmias ProDefibrillation and Cardioversion ProComplications of Acute Myocardial Infarction ProPacemakers and Pacing ProImplantable Cardioverter Defibrillators Pro  What it could mean if you experience heart palpitations     4 minutes reading time  18-Apr-19  The last year of my life has been a brutal one. At the age of 22, I am in the lowest of lows and I desperately need some help!Here’s my tale:About a year ago, a couple months after an extremely...   TaylorMasonJoin the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy Document ID  4718 (v44)  Last updated on   19 November 2022 Next review date  18 November 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  BradycardiaNext article Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Arrhythmias: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/heart-health/palpitations-leaflet/abnormal-heart-rhythms-arrhythmiasCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


