# Arthritis: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Bones, Joints and Muscles  Arthritis Last updated by Dr Toni Hazell   Authored by Dr Colin Tidy   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 22 Jan 2023   Originally published 11 Mar 2015   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Osteoarthritis      Reactive Arthritis      Septic Arthritis      Knee Replacement In this series     Osteoarthritis      Reactive Arthritis      Septic Arthritis      Knee Replacement Arthritis means inflammation in a joint (like your knee, hip, elbow or fingers). It is a common problem and generally affects older people, although there are some rare conditions that cause arthritis in children and teenagers. There are lots of types of arthritis. Some give you short-term aches in the joints and then resolve completely, others can cause long-term problems and permanently affect how your joints move.This leaflet will explain a bit about how joints work and then go through the main causes of arthritis in easy-to-read language.In this article   What is arthritis?   What causes arthritis?   Conditions similar to arthritis   Arthritis symptoms   How is arthritis diagnosed?   Arthritis treatment   What is the outlook (prognosis) for arthritis? In This Article     ArthritisIn this article What is arthritis?  What causes arthritis?  Conditions similar to arthritis  Arthritis symptoms  How is arthritis diagnosed?  Arthritis treatment  What is the outlook (prognosis) for arthritis? What is arthritis?Arthritis means inflammation of joints. Arthritis is very common. There are many causes of arthritis. Children and adults of all ages can be affected by arthritis, although the most common type is osteoarthritis and that affects older people. It is also more common in women than it is in men. See the separate leaflet called Osteoarthritis for more details.Arthritis may affect just one joint, a few joints or many joints. Each cause of arthritis tends to have a typical pattern in terms of which joints are affected and the age of people most likely to be affected.Understanding jointsNormal jointA joint is situated where two bones meet. Joints allow movement and flexibility of various parts of the body. The movement of the bones is caused by muscles which pull on tendons that are attached to bone. Cartilage covers the end of bones. Between the cartilage of two bones that form a joint there is a small amount of thick fluid called synovial fluid. This lubricates the joint, which allows smooth movement between the bones.The synovium is the connective tissue that surrounds a joint. Synovial fluid is made by cells of the synovium. The outer part of the synovium is called the capsule. This is tough, gives the joint stability, and stops the bones from moving out of joint. Surrounding ligaments and muscles also help to give support and stability to joints. Our picks for Arthritis What foods are good for arthritis?What we eat can help to relieve the symptoms of many health conditions, including arthritis. Al...   6min  What foods are good for arthritis?   6min  What's the difference between osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis?   5min  What causes osteoarthritis?   9min  What it's like to be a young person with arthritis    5minDo you need a physiotherapist?Book a private appointment with a local physio today Book now What causes arthritis?The two most common types of arthritis are osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis. However, there are many different causes of arthritis.The following list includes some of the common conditions that mainly affect joints. For further information, each condition has a separate leaflet.Rheumatoid arthritisRheumatoid arthritis (RA) causes inflammation, pain, and swelling of joints. Persistent inflammation over time can damage affected joints. The severity can vary from mild to severe. The earlier treatment is started, the less joint damage is likely to occur.OsteoarthritisOsteoarthritis (OA) causes pain and stiffness in joints. Symptoms may be helped by exercises, some physical devices and treatments, and losing weight if you are overweight. It can be caused or worsened by trauma, in which case it may be known as post-traumatic arthritis.Septic arthritisSeptic arthritis is an infection in a joint. Symptoms of this arthritis include pain and tenderness over a joint, pain on moving the joint, and feeling unwell. It is an uncommon infection but very serious. Emergency treatment in hospital is needed.Ankylosing spondylitisAnkylosing spondylitis is a form of arthritis. It mainly affects the lower back. Other joints and other parts of the body are sometimes affected. Treatment includes regular exercise and anti-inflammatory medicines. The severity of ankylosing spondylitis varies from mild to severe. An eye complication called uveitis can be serious but can be treated successfully if treatment is given promptly.GoutGout causes attacks of pain and swelling when uric acid in the body crystalises in one or more joints. An anti-inflammatory painkiller usually eases an attack quickly. Lifestyle factors may reduce the risk of having gout attacks. These include losing weight (if overweight), eating a healthy diet, and not drinking much alcohol or sugar-sweetened soft drinks.Calcium pyrophosphate depositionCalcium pyrophosphate is a substance produced in the cartilages of the joints. It can become deposited as crystals on joint tissues. This is called calcium pyrophosphate deposition (CPPD). CPPD can cause a number of problems of which the most well known is pseudogout. This is almost identical to gout, causing attacks of pain and swelling in one or more joints. Some people get damage to the joint, causing a type of long-term arthritis. CPPD may cause no symptoms and is sometimes picked up on an X-ray done for an unrelated condition. Unlike gout, there is no special therapy for pseudogout.Psoriatic arthritisPsoriatic arthritis causes inflammation, pain, and swelling of joints in some people who have psoriasis (a skin condition). Other parts of the body may also be affected. For example, inflammation may also affect tendons and ligaments. The severity can vary from mild to severe. In some cases, affected joints become damaged which can cause disability.Reactive arthritisReactive arthritis means that you develop inflammation in joints after you have had an infection in some other part of the body. Other symptoms usually develop in addition to the arthritis. Symptoms commonly last 3-6 months. In some cases the arthritis persists long-term. There is a rare 'triad' syndrome where arthritis, urethritis and conjunctivitis occur at the same time. Juvenile idiopathic arthritisJuvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is an unusual condition in which joint inflammation occurs in children under the age of 16 years. It lasts for at least six weeks. Arthritis causes inflammation, pain and swelling of the affected joints. The severity can vary from mild to severe. The earlier the treatment is started, the less joint damage is likely to occur.Conditions similar to arthritisThere are some medical problems which don't affect the joints predominantly, but can cause joint problems as they progress. Examples include:Systemic lupus erythematosusSystemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) can cause various symptoms, the most common being joint pain and stiffness, skin rashes and tiredness. Problems with kidneys and other organs can occur in severe cases.Gut (bowel) conditionsSome gut conditions, especially inflammatory bowel diseases such as Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, may cause arthritis.Cervical spondylosisCervical spondylosis is a 'wear and tear' of the bones (vertebrae) and discs in the neck. It is a normal part of ageing and does not cause symptoms in many people. However, it is sometimes a cause of neck pain. Symptoms tend to come and go. In severe cases, the degeneration may cause irritation or pressure on the spinal nerve roots or spinal cord. This can cause arm or leg symptoms.Polymyalgia rheumaticaPolymyalgia rheumatica (PMR) causes pain, stiffness and tenderness in large muscles, typically around the shoulders, upper arms and hips. The cause is not known. Some people with PMR develop a related condition called giant cell arteritis (GCA) which can be more serious and may threaten sight.FibromyalgiaFibromyalgia causes pains and tenderness in many areas of the body, and tiredness. You may also have other symptoms.Arthritis symptomsThe symptoms of arthritis vary depending on the type of arthritis and severity of the underlying cause. The symptoms include:Joint pain, tenderness and stiffness.Restricted movement of the joints.Warmth and red skin over the affected joint.Weakness and muscle wasting around the joint.How is arthritis diagnosed?As with all medical conditions, the diagnosis is made by a combination of a history, examination and investigations. Some patients will need to be referred to a specialist. For inflammatory arthritis (eg, rheumatoid and psoriatic), all patients will be seen by a rheumatologist (joint specialist). For a non-inflammatory arthritis such as osteoarthritis, management is usually fully in primary care, by a GP and sometimes other healthcare professionals such as a physiotherapist, with referral being reserved for those who may need surgery.Arthritis treatmentAlthough there is no cure for arthritis, there are treatments available for all forms. However, the treatment will depend on the cause of arthritis.Treatments may include:Medicines (such as NSAIDs, used by mouth or topically).Physiotherapy.Occupational therapy.Weight loss, and diet changes.Regular exercise, sometimes in a supervised session.Heat and cold compresses.Mobility assistance devices, such as canes or walkers.Surgery.Some causes of arthritis only need treatment for a short time. Other causes of arthritis may need lifelong treatment. For osteoarthritis, if it affects the hip or the knee, surgery can be done to replace the entire joint. See the separate leaflets called Knee Replacement and Hip Replacement. For elbow arthritis there is a technique known as elbow joint resurfacing, but this is not currently recommended by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) as there is not enough evidence for its safety and effectiveness. Some patients may be offered this procedure as part of a trial.What is the outlook (prognosis) for arthritis?Some types of arthritis are short-lived and don't leave you with any problems. Examples are reactive arthritis, which usually goes away by itself and juvenile arthritis which may sometimes clear up without any long-term problems. Other types come and go, like gout. Rheumatoid arthritis tends to stay with you for the long term, but can be controlled with medication. Osteoarthritis can usually be controlled with a combination of painkillers, physiotherapy, and surgery, and by reducing pressure on the joint by avoiding being overweight. Next article  Osteoarthritis  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Osteoarthritis in over 16s: diagnosis and management; NICE guideline (October 2022)Rheumatoid arthritis in adults: management; NICE Guideline (July 2018 - last updated October 2020)Lateral elbow resurfacing for arthritis; NICE Interventional procedures guidance, September 2021Versus ArthritisGout; NICE CKS, June 2022 (UK access only)Related InformationWhat it's like to be a young person with arthritis Rheumatoid ArthritisOsteoarthritisPsoriatic ArthritisSeptic Arthritis  What foods are good for arthritis?    6 minutes reading time  25-Apr-23  What's the difference between osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis?    5 minutes reading time  06-Apr-23  How to treat osteoarthritis    7 minutes reading time  30-Mar-23       Video: Knee replacement recovery exercises  what has lupus symptoms but not lupus? MS symptoms but not MS? symptoms of Rheumatoid arthritis but isn't?i have thinning hair, crumbling teeth. severe joint pain, spondylosis of the spine and neck....   sharen24968Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Authored by   Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated by   Dr Toni Hazell Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  29025 (v3)  Originally published on   11 March 2015  Last updated on   22 January 2023 Next review date  21 January 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Next article Osteoarthritis Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Arthritis: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/bones-joints-muscles/arthritisCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


