# Axial Spondyloarthritis (axSpA and Axial SpA) | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Bones, Joints and Muscles  Axial Spondyloarthritis axSpA and Axial SpA Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy   Peer reviewed by Dr Laurence Knott  Last updated 25 Aug 2021   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsAxial spondyloarthritis (also known as axSpA or axial SpA) is a painful, chronic arthritis that mainly affects the joints of the spine, and also the joints connecting each side of the base of the spine with the pelvis (sacroiliac joints). It can also affect other joints in the body, as well as tendons and ligaments.In this article   What is axial spondyloarthritis?   How common is axial spondyloarthritis?   What causes axial spondyloarthritis?   What are the symptoms of axial spondyloarthritis?   What other conditions are associated with axial spondyloarthritis?   How is axial spondyloarthritis diagnosed?   How is axial spondyloarthritis treated?   What are the complications of axial spondyloarthritis?   What is the outlook for axial spondyloarthritis? In This Article     Axial SpondyloarthritisaxSpA and Axial SpAIn this article What is axial spondyloarthritis?  How common is axial spondyloarthritis?  What causes axial spondyloarthritis?  What are the symptoms of axial spondyloarthritis?  What other conditions are associated with axial spondyloarthritis?  How is axial spondyloarthritis diagnosed?  How is axial spondyloarthritis treated?  What are the complications of axial spondyloarthritis?  What is the outlook for axial spondyloarthritis? What is axial spondyloarthritis?SpondyloarthritisSpondyloarthritis is a type of inflammatory arthritis. This happens when the body's immune system, which is meant to keep us well by fighting infection, starts to cause inflammation in the joints and the areas around them, causing damage. There are two main types of spondyloarthritis:Axial spondyloarthritis, which mainly causes pain and stiffness in the spine and sacroiliac joints.Peripheral spondyloarthritis, which mainly causes pain, stiffness and swelling in the hands, feet, arms and legs.Some people with axial spondyloarthritis also have peripheral symptoms and some people with peripheral spondyloarthritis have back symptoms.Axial spondyloarthritisIf arthritis of the sacroiliac joints (pelvis) or spine and sacroiliac joints can be seen on X-ray, the term used is radiographic axial spondyloarthritis (r-axSpA). This condition is also called ankylosing spondylitis. See also the separate leaflet called Ankylosing Spondylitis for more information.If there are no signs of sacroiliitis on X-ray but there is evidence of inflammation in the joints on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, the term used is non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis (nr-axSpA).Some people with nr-axSpA go on to develop r-axSpA. It is estimated that this occurs in about 1 in 20 within 5 years, and 1 in 5 within 10 years.How common is axial spondyloarthritis?Axial spondylitis most often begins between 20 and 30 years of age. Nearly all people affected by axial spondyloarthritis are aged less than 45 years when the disease first appears.About twice as many men as women have ankylosing spondylitis. However, non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis affects a similar number of women and men.What causes axial spondyloarthritis?The exact cause of axial spondyloarthritis is not clear. Researchers believe that people with certain genes develop axial spondyloarthritis when they are exposed to a certain virus, bacteria or other environmental trigger.More than 9 out of 10 people with axial spondyloarthritis have a gene called HLA-B27. But most people who have this gene never develop axial spondyloarthritis.What are the symptoms of axial spondyloarthritis?Low back, buttocks and hip pain are usually the first symptoms. The symptoms of axial spondyloarthritis include:Pain in the low back, buttocks and hips that develops slowly over weeks or months.Pain, swelling, redness and warmth in the toes, heels, ankles, knees, ribcage, upper spine, shoulders and neck.Stiffness when first waking up or after long periods of rest.Back pain during the night or early morning.Pain that gets better with exercise but doesn't improve with rest.Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) usually work well to relieve the pain.Fatigue.Appetite loss.Some people with axial spondyloarthritis also develop symptoms of peripheral spondyloarthritis.What other conditions are associated with axial spondyloarthritis?People with spondyloarthritis also have an increased risk of developing other conditions, including:Cardiovascular disease, including heart disease (eg, angina and heart attack), cerebrovascular disease (transient ischaemic attacks and stroke) and peripheral arterial disease.Thinning of bones (osteoporosis).Psoriasis.Inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis).Certain infections, such as some stomach bugs or sexually transmitted infections (STIs)A painful eye condition called uveitis.How is axial spondyloarthritis diagnosed?Axial spondyloarthritis can be difficult to diagnose and there is no one single test that confirms or rules out the diagnosis. Investigations include:Blood tests, which may include an HLA-B27 test.X-rays: radiographic axial spondyloarthritis (ankylosing spondylitis) is suggested by X-ray changes of the sacroiliac joints and spine.MRI scanning: in some people with symptoms of axial spondyloarthritis, inflammation of the sacroiliac joints can be detected on MRI despite X-rays having appeared normal. The diagnosis is then non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis.How is axial spondyloarthritis treated?There is no cure for axial spondyloarthritis, but treatment aims to:Relieve pain and stiffness in the back and any other affected areas.Keep your spine straight.Prevent joint and organ damage.Preserve joint function and mobility.Improve your quality of life.Early, treatment is very important to prevent long-term complications and joint damage. Treatments include medication, non-drug therapies, healthy lifestyle habits and, rarely, surgery.Self-careBecause of the increased risk of cardiovascular disease, it is even more important to reduce your risk of cardiovascular disease:Eat a healthy diet. Eating anti-inflammatory foods, like the ones found in a Mediterranean diet may help.Avoid smoking. Smoking worsens overall health, and it can speed up disease activity and joint damage. It can also make it harder to breathe. Consult your doctor about ways to help you quit.Regular physical activity helps prevent stiffness and preserves the range of movement in your neck and back. Activities such as walking, swimming, yoga and t'ai chi can help with flexibility and posture.Good posture can help ease pain and stiffness. Simple changes such as adjusting the height of your computer monitor or desk can help. Avoid staying in cramped or bent positions, and try to alternate between standing and sitting positions.Stretching exercises can help to relieve pain and stiffness.Pace your activities depending on how you feel. Take short breaks throughout the day if you're feeling tired.Physiotherapy and occupational therapyPhysiotherapy will help you to develop an exercise plan, and teach you to strengthen and stretch your muscles to help you stay mobile and reduce pain.Occupational therapists can assess whether any assistive devices will help you, and give you advice on how to protect your joints and make daily tasks easier.MedicationsNon-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) NSAIDs are the most commonly used drugs to treat axial spondyloarthritis and help relieve pain. Examples of NSAIDs are ibuprofen, naproxen, indometacin, diclofenac and celecoxib.Other painkillersOther painkillers such as paracetamol may also be used to help reduce pain.Biological medicines Biologics can be used to control the disease process. The main ones used for axial spondyloarthritis are called tumour necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors (adalimumab, certolizumab pegol, etanercept, golimumab or infliximab).If you are unable to take a TNF inhibitor or they are not effective then other medicines, such as secukinumab or ixekizumab, may be used.Editor's noteDr Krishna Vakharia, 18th October 2023The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has recommended another biological option called bimekizumab for treating axial spondyloarthritis if conventional therapy hasn't worked or if tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha inhibitors are not suitable.If this is an option for you, your doctor will discuss this with you.For further information on this, take a look at the further reading section.Steroid injectionsInjecting steroids into a knee or shoulder can provide relief of pain and stiffness.SurgeryMost people with axial spondyloarthritis will not need surgery. But joint replacement can help people with severe pain or joint damage. Surgery may also help straighten a severely bent forward spine.What are the complications of axial spondyloarthritis?In addition to the increased risk of associated conditions as outlined above, there is:Increased risk of fractures of the spine.For a small number of people with chronic progressive disease, development of significant disability due to new bone forming that causes the bones of the spine to fuse together (spinal fusion).The complication of experiencing side-effects from the medicines used for treatment.People with persistent and severe symptoms of axial spondyloarthritis may have a reduced quality of life due to pain, stiffness, fatigue and sleep problems.What is the outlook for axial spondyloarthritis?There is no cure for axial spondyloarthritis and the outlook (prognosis) tends to be variable. The pattern of symptoms within the first 10 years of disease often suggests the likely long-term severity of symptoms and disability.Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Spondyloarthritis in over 16s: diagnosis and management; NICE Guidance (Feb 2017)Magrey MN, Danve AS, Ermann J, et al; Recognizing Axial Spondyloarthritis: A Guide for Primary Care. Mayo Clin Proc. 2020 Nov95(11):2499-2508. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.02.007. Epub 2020 Jul 29.Kroon FP, van der Burg LR, Ramiro S, et al; Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for axial spondyloarthritis (ankylosing spondylitis and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Jul 17(7):CD010952. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010952.pub2.Secukinumab for treating non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis; NICE Technology appraisal guidance, July 2021Ixekizumab for treating axial spondyloarthritis; NICE Technology appraisal guidance, July 2021Ward MM, Deodhar A, Gensler LS, et al; 2019 Update of the American College of Rheumatology/Spondylitis Association of America/Spondyloarthritis Research and Treatment Network Recommendations for the Treatment of Ankylosing Spondylitis and Nonradiographic Axial Spondyloarthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2019 Oct71(10):1285-1299. doi: 10.1002/acr.24025. Epub 2019 Aug 21.van der Heijde D, Ramiro S, Landewe R, et al; 2016 update of the ASAS-EULAR management recommendations for axial spondyloarthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017 Jun76(6):978-991. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-210770. Epub 2017 Jan 13.Bimekizumab for treating axial spondyloarthritis; Technology appraisal guidance, October 2023Related InformationAnkylosing SpondylitisAnkylosing Spondylitis ProSpondyloarthritis (Axial, Peripheral, Radiographic and Non-radiographic) ProJoint PainAnti-inflammatory Tablets (NSAIDs)  what has lupus symptoms but not lupus? MS symptoms but not MS? symptoms of Rheumatoid arthritis but isn't?i have thinning hair, crumbling teeth. severe joint pain, spondylosis of the spine and neck....   sharen24968Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy Peer reviewed by  Dr Laurence Knott Document ID  31567 (v1)  Last updated on   25 August 2021 Next review date  24 August 2026 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Axial Spondyloarthritis (axSpA and Axial SpA)     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/bones-joints-muscles/axial-spondyloarthritis?fbclid=IwAR2_g9z_oQLlHYbp4KVfFLNdBCKDjqTjUJGGOfUbUyANt8Jd86iQ7tq3G7ACopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


