# Back and Spine Pain | Causes and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Bones, Joints and Muscles  Back and Spine Pain Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Laurence Knott  Last updated 16 Oct 2020   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Lower Back Pain      Slipped Disc      Spinal Stenosis      Cauda Equina Syndrome      Thoracic Back Pain      Back Pain in Children In this series     Lower Back Pain      Slipped Disc      Spinal Stenosis      Cauda Equina Syndrome      Thoracic Back Pain      Back Pain in Children Back pain is extremely common - so common that most of us will have back pain at some point; even children can get back pain. This leaflet gives some general information about the back and back pain. It will also direct you to pages with more detailed information on the different conditions that can cause back pain.In this article   Understanding the back   What are the symptoms of back pain?   Who gets back pain?   What are the causes?   Do I need any tests?   What should I do if I have back pain?   When should I seek medical advice?   What treatments may be offered?   How can I avoid back pain?   What is the outlook (prognosis)? In This Article     Back and Spine PainIn this article Understanding the back  What are the symptoms of back pain?  Who gets back pain?  What are the causes?  Do I need any tests?  What should I do if I have back pain?  When should I seek medical advice?  What treatments may be offered?  How can I avoid back pain?  What is the outlook (prognosis)? What are the different types of back pain?Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGPUnderstanding the backThe spine is made up of many bones called vertebrae. These are roughly circular and between each vertebra is a disc. The discs are made of strong rubber-like tissue which allows the spine to be fairly flexible. A disc has a stronger fibrous outer part and a softer jelly-like middle part. The middle part is called the nucleus pulposus.Strong ligaments also attach to nearby (adjacent) vertebrae to give extra support and strength to the spine. There are various muscles that are attached to the spine which enable the spine to bend and move in various ways. Small joints, called facet joints, help to attach the vertebrae to each other. The sacrum is formed from five vertebrae that are joined together (fused) to make one bone. The sacroiliac joints are the large joints that join the sacrum to the main bone of the pelvis (the ilium).Spinal cordClose-up diagram lumbar spinal cordThe spinal cord, which contains the nerves that come from the brain, is protected by the spine. Nerves from the spinal cord come out from between the vertebrae to relay messages to and from various parts of the body. The lower end of the spinal cord is at the level of the first or second lumbar vertebra. Below this the nerves from the last part of the spinal cord branch to form what is called the cauda equina (from the Latin for a horse's tail). Our picks for Back and Spine Pain When to worry about back painFour in five of us have back pain at some point, most commonly in our lower backs (lumbar area...   5min  When to worry about back pain   5min  How to relieve sciatica pain    5min  Could new guidance change how we treat chronic pain?   7min  When to worry about back pain   5minWhat are the symptoms of back pain?Back pain is pain that is felt anywhere from the bottom of the neck to your bottom. It can range from mild and fleeting to severe or long-lasting. It can come on for an obvious reason - such as after a fall or lifting something very heavy or awkward - or it can just come on for no reason at all.Sometimes back pain causes other symptoms:Pain in the leg or foot.Pain in the buttock or thigh.Weakness in one or both legs.Pins and needles in one or both legs.Other sensations in the legs, such as warmth or a burning feeling.Who gets back pain?Everyone can get back pain at some time in their life. The most common type of back pain, low back pain, affects about 8 in 10 people. Back pain even occurs in children: 3 out of every 10 young people have had pain in their back.What are the causes?Common causesLower back pain, sometimes also called simple or nonspecific lower back pain:This is the most common type of back pain.It isn't possible to say exactly what the cause is of lower back pain but there is rarely any serious problem with the back.See the separate leaflet called Lower Back Pain.Slipped disc, sometimes called prolapsed disc:Often causes severe low back pain.Pain is due to the tissues from a disc pressing on the structures nearby - for example, nerves, when the pain is called nerve root pain.May cause sciatica, which is pain that goes down the leg to the foot.See the separate leaflet called Slipped Disc (Prolapsed Disc).Thoracic back the pain:Thoracic back pain is more likely than lower back pain to have a serious cause.It is more common in young people, especially girls, possibly due to carrying heavy school bags, when it is not serious.See the separate leaflet called Back Pain in Children.Less common causesArthritis of all types can cause back pain:Osteoarthritis is a common type of arthritis that affects people as they get older. It can be a cause of back pain.Spinal stenosis is a common cause of pain in the buttocks and legs, although it doesn't always cause back pain:It mainly affects people aged over 60 years.It is often caused by osteoarthritis of the spine.See the separate leaflet called Spinal Stenosis.Rheumatoid arthritis is a much less common type of arthritis. It can occasionally affect the spine.Ankylosing spondylitis is a form of arthritis that mainly affects the spine:It can affect other joints and other parts of the body.See the separate leaflet called Ankylosing Spondylitis.Fracture of a vertebra:Road traffic accidents, falls, sports injuries and violent attacks can all lead to fractures of the spine causing back pain.Osteoporosis:Causes bones to be more likely to break with a minor injury.May cause thoracic back pain, as well as low back pain.Is more common in the elderly, particularly women.Is more common in people on steroid medication.Shingles:Shingles is a common infection, which can cause pain before any sign of the typical rash.Scoliosis of the spine:Scoliosis causes the spine to curve to the left or right side.It is often painless.See the separate leaflet called Scoliosis and Kyphosis (Curvature of the Spine).Rare causesTumours.Infection - for example, tuberculosis.Cauda equina syndrome:This is a rare but serious type of nerve root problem.The nerves at the bottom end of the spine are squashed causing:Low back pain.Problems with the bowel and bladder (usually not being able to pass urine).Numbness in the 'saddle' area, which is around the back passage (anus).Weakness in one or both legs.See the separate leaflet called Cauda Equina Syndrome.If you suspect cauda equina syndrome you should see a doctor immediately.Do you need a physiotherapist?Book a private appointment with a local physio today Book now Do I need any tests?This depends on what is thought to be the cause of your back pain. Your doctor will usually be able to tell what the likeliest cause is of your pain, simply by talking to you and examining you. If you haven't had your back pain for very long and your doctor doesn't think it is serious, you are unlikely to need any tests.The pain is more likely to have a serious cause if it is constant and becoming worse or if you are unwell in other ways, such as having a temperature or losing weight. In this case you may need further tests, such as:Blood tests.X-rays.Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan.Bone scan.What should I do if I have back pain?Usually back pain settles down quickly, within a week or so. You should try to keep as active as you can and do your normal activities, if possible. If the pain is stopping you from being able to keep moving then you should take painkillers regularly so that you can. The old advice of resting until the pain eases has been proven to be wrong.When should I seek medical advice?Generally if your pain lasts longer than 4-6 weeks or if your symptoms change, you should see a doctor.Other reasons for seeking medical advice are:You suspect cauda equina syndrome (see above):Seek immediate medical advice.Your pain is constant and is not eased by lying down or resting.Your pain is gradually becoming worse and worse.You are experiencing weakness in any of your muscles in your leg or foot or you are tripping up (which can be a symptom of weak ankle muscles).You have a lack of feeling (numbness) in any part of your bottom or leg.Your pain started after a road accident or a fall.You have been diagnosed with osteoporosis.You have recently taken or are still taking steroid medication.Your pain is worst in the early hours of the morning and on waking and is eased by activity.What treatments may be offered?Aside from keeping active and taking painkillers if necessary, there are many other possible treatments. Which treatment is suitable for you may depend on the cause of your pain.Structured exercise programme.Manual therapy, including massage and spinal manipulation may help symptoms in some people.Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) may be useful in some people with long-standing (chronic) back pain.Spinal injections.Surgery:This is rarely needed.About one person in every ten with a slipped disc (prolapsed disc) may benefit from surgery.May be needed urgently for cauda equina syndrome.See separate leaflets on the different causes of back pain for more details of other possible treatments.How can I avoid back pain?In general, you should try to keep fit and active and exercise regularly - swimming, walking, running and cycling are all excellent forms of exercise. However not all forms of back pain can be avoided. Also it isn't known why some people develop back pain and some people never do.What is the outlook (prognosis)?Most people with back pain that doesn't have a serious cause, get better fairly quickly, often within a week or so. If you have low back pain (including pain caused by a disc problem), you will recover quicker if you can get moving again quickly and get back to work as soon as you are able.It is common to have further bouts (recurrences). Next article  Lower Back Pain  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Low back pain and sciatica in over 16s: assessment and management; NICE Guidelines (November 2016 - last updated December 2020)Back pain - low (without radiculopathy); NICE CKS, September 2020 (UK access only)Sciatica (lumbar radiculopathy); NICE CKS, September 2020 (UK access only)Trompeter K, Fett D, Platen P; Prevalence of Back Pain in Sports: A Systematic Review of the Literature. Sports Med. 2017 Jun47(6):1183-1207. doi: 10.1007/s40279-016-0645-3.Related InformationWhen to worry about back painLower Back PainSlipped Disc (Prolapsed Disc)Back Pain in ChildrenSpinal Stenosis  When to worry about back pain    5 minutes reading time  18-May-23  How to relieve sciatica pain     5 minutes reading time  10-Feb-23  Everyday activities that can cause back pain    6 minutes reading time  01-Jul-18  How to get back pain under control    5 minutes reading time  30-Jan-20  I injured my back 18 months ago, and its got progressively worse. I've had MRI's, seen numerous osteopaths and physios, had steroid and nerve ablasion. Absolutely nothing has helped. Biggest issue is...   andy80463Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Laurence Knott Document ID  29857 (v2)  Last updated on   16 October 2020 Next review date  15 October 2025 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Next article Lower Back Pain Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Back and Spine Pain      close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/bones-joints-muscles/back-and-spine-painCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


