# Bile Acid Diarrhoea & Malabsorption: Causes and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Digestive Health    Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)  Bile Acid Diarrhoea Last updated by Dr Pippa Vincent   Peer reviewed by Dr Toni Hazell  Last updated 28 Jul 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)      Trapped Wind, Gas and Bloating      Antispasmodics      Probiotics and Prebiotics In this series     Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)      Trapped Wind, Gas and Bloating      Antispasmodics      Probiotics and Prebiotics Bile acid diarrhoea is common, especially in people who are thought to have irritable bowel syndrome. Bile acid diarrhoea may be caused by a problem with the bowel. Much more often there is no medical problem causing the diarrhoea.Bile acid diarrhoea responds very well to treatment with a medicine called a bile acid binder. The outcome is usually very good if there is no other problem with the bowel.In this article   What is bile acid diarrhoea?   What causes bile acid diarrhoea?   How common is bile acid diarrhoea?   What are the symptoms of bile acid diarrhoea?   How is bile acid diarrhoea diagnosed?   What are the treatments for bile acid diarrhoea?   What is the outcome?   Understanding the gallbladder and bile In This Article     Bile Acid DiarrhoeaIn this article What is bile acid diarrhoea?  What causes bile acid diarrhoea?  How common is bile acid diarrhoea?  What are the symptoms of bile acid diarrhoea?  How is bile acid diarrhoea diagnosed?  What are the treatments for bile acid diarrhoea?  What is the outcome?  Understanding the gallbladder and bile What is bile acid diarrhoea?If the bile acids are not reabsorbed into the bloodstream then they enter the large bowel (colon). Bile acids in the large bowel cause abnormally high levels of water and salts to get into the large bowel from the bloodstream.The increased amount of water and salts in the large bowel then causes watery diarrhoea. Bile acid diarrhoea is sometimes called bile acid malabsorption because the diarrhoea is caused by the body being unable to stop losing water and salts into the bowel.What causes bile acid diarrhoea?Bile acid diarrhoea may be caused by a number of diseases affecting the gut, especially the last part of the small bowel (terminal ileum), which then leads to the large bowel (colon). For example, bowel acid diarrhoea may be caused if the terminal ileum has to be removed or in a condition called Crohn's disease.Other conditions that may lead to bile acid diarrhoea include having the gallbladder removed (cholecystectomy), coeliac disease, diseases affecting the pancreas, and after radiotherapy. Bile acid diarrhoea may also be caused by some medications, including metformin, which is used to treat type 2 diabetes.However, many people who have bile acid diarrhoea do not have any obvious cause. This is called idiopathic bile acid diarrhoea, which means the cause is not known.How common is bile acid diarrhoea?It is estimated that bile acid diarrhoea affects about 1 in every 100 people. Bile acid diarrhoea is thought to affect about 1 in 3 people who are diagnosed as having irritable bowel syndrome. Bile acid diarrhoea in which the cause is unknown (idiopathic bile acid diarrhoea) most often occurs in men and women aged between 30 and 70 years.What are the symptoms of bile acid diarrhoea?There is often a long history of diarrhoea. See also the separate leaflet called Diarrhoea.The diarrhoea is usually watery without any blood. The diarrhoea may occur all of the time (continuous) or come and go (intermittent). There may be no other symptoms but this will depend on the cause of the bile acid diarrhoea.How is bile acid diarrhoea diagnosed?Bile acid diarrhoea if often diagnosed just by a having trial of a medicine used for treatment (see below). The medicines are usually very effective and so an improvement of diarrhoea when taking the medicine indicates a likely diagnosis of bile acid diarrhoea.However, blood tests and a stool (faeces) sample test will often be advised to see if there are any other causes for the diarrhoea.There are also some specific tests for bile acid diarrhoea. These tests are not widely available but include:A test called 75selenium homocholic acid taurine (75SeHCAT), measuring the amount of bile acids in the stool; orA blood test for 7a-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one (C4). Increased levels indicate bile acid diarrhoea.The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) issued guidance in 2021 on the use of SeHCAT to diagnose bile acid diarrhoea. It recommended that this test should not be used routinely because of a lack of evidence of its accuracy.What are the treatments for bile acid diarrhoea?The main treatments for bile acid diarrhoea are a low-fat diet and taking a medicine called a bile acid binder. A low-fat diet helps to reduce the symptoms of bile acid diarrhoea. Medicines that bind to bile acids in the gut (bowel) are usually very effective.Examples of bile acid binder medicines are colestyramine, colestipol or colesevelam. Colestyramine is the medicine most often used and is usually very effective. Colesevelam has been shown to be effective if treatment with cholestyramine is not successful.Other medicines that are used to treat any cause of diarrhoea can also be used to treat bile acid diarrhoea. See the separate leaflet called Diarrhoea Medicine for more details.What is the outcome?Most people with bile acid diarrhoea in which cause is unknown (idiopathic bile acid diarrhoea) respond very well to treatment with a bile acid binder medicine. However, the medicine may need to be taken for a long time (years) in order to stop the diarrhoea.Bile acid diarrhoea may be caused by an underlying condition affecting the bowel. The outcome (prognosis) will then depend on the underlying bowel condition.Understanding the gallbladder and bileLiver functionBile is a fluid made in the liver. Bile contains various substances including bile pigments, bile acids, bile salts, cholesterol and lecithin. Bile is passed into tiny tubes called bile ducts. The bile ducts join together (like the branches of a tree) to form the main bile duct. Bile constantly drips down the bile ducts, into the main bile duct and then into the gut.The gallbladder lies under the liver on the right side of the upper tummy (abdomen). It is like a pouch which comes off the main bile duct and fills with bile. It is a 'reservoir' which stores bile. The gallbladder squeezes (contracts) when we eat. This empties the stored bile back into the main bile duct. The bile passes along the remainder of the bile duct into the duodenum, which is the first part of the small bowel (gut) after the stomach.The bile then moves with the rest of the bowel contents along the small bowel. The last part of the small bowel is called the terminal ileum, which then leads on to the large bowel (colon). Normally most of the bile acids pass from the terminal ileum back into the bloodstream, ie they are reabsorbed into the bloodstream.Previous article   Trapped Wind, Gas and Bloating Next article  Antispasmodics  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Camilleri M; Bile Acid diarrhea: prevalence, pathogenesis, and therapy. Gut Liver. 2015 May 239(3):332-9. doi: 10.5009/gnl14397.Wilcox C, Turner J, Green J; Systematic review: the management of chronic diarrhoea due to bile acid malabsorption. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2014 May39(9):923-39. doi: 10.1111/apt.12684. Epub 2014 Mar 6.Barkun AN, Love J, Gould M, et al; Bile acid malabsorption in chronic diarrhea: pathophysiology and treatment. Can J Gastroenterol. 2013 Nov27(11):653-9.Camilleri M; Advances in understanding of bile acid diarrhea. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Jan8(1):49-61. doi: 10.1586/17474124.2014.851599. Epub 2013 Nov 25.Watson L, Lalji A, Bodla S, et al; Management of bile acid malabsorption using low-fat dietary interventions: a useful strategy applicable to some patients with diarrhoea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome? Clin Med (Lond). 2015 Dec15(6):536-40. doi: 10.7861/clinmedicine.15-6-536.SeHCAT (tauroselcholic [75 selenium] acid) for diagnosing bile acid diarrhoea.; NICE Diagnostics guidance, November 2021Related InformationBile Acid Malabsorption and Diarrhoea ProMethylcellulose tabletsColestyramine sachets (Questran)DicycloverineCo-phenotrope tablets for diarrhoea  Probiotics for IBS: do they work?    8 minutes reading time  14-Feb-24  Hypnotherapy for IBS: the gut-brain axis     6 minutes reading time  26-Jan-24  What are probiotics?    5 minutes reading time  27-Jan-23  What does your poo say about you?    6 minutes reading time  28-Dec-17  Hello everyone, this is my first post on here.last week I tested positive for H pylori after suffering from the usual symptoms so I'm on the triple therapy.my question is can H pylori cause swollen...   mark60763Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Pippa Vincent Peer reviewed by  Dr Toni Hazell Document ID  29244 (v3)  Last updated on   28 July 2023 Next review date  26 July 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Trapped Wind, Gas and BloatingNext article Antispasmodics Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Bile Acid Diarrhoea & Malabsorption: Causes and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/digestive-health/irritable-bowel-syndrome-leaflet/bile-acid-diarrhoeaCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


