# Bisphosphonates: how do bisphosphonates work? | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Bones, Joints and Muscles    Osteoporosis  Bisphosphonates Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy   Authored by Jenny Whitehall   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy  Last updated 16 Mar 2023   Originally published 18 Nov 2011   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Osteoporosis      DXA Scan      Calcium-rich Food      Vitamin D Deficiency      Preventing Steroid-induced Osteoporosis In this series     Osteoporosis      DXA Scan      Calcium-rich Food      Vitamin D Deficiency      Preventing Steroid-induced Osteoporosis Bisphosphonates are a group of medicines used to treat conditions that affect your bones. Different bisphosphonates are available for different conditions.In this article   What are bisphosphonates?   How do bisphosphonates work?   Who should have bisphosphonates?   How long do bisphosphonates take to work?   How long should you stay on bisphosphonates?   Which bisphosphonates might I be prescribed?   How to take bisphosphonate tablets   When taking bisphosphonates   What to do if you forget to take your tablets   What are the side-effects of bisphosphonates?   Can I buy bisphosphonates?   Who should not take bisphosphonates? In This Article     BisphosphonatesIn this article What are bisphosphonates?  How do bisphosphonates work?  Who should have bisphosphonates?  How long do bisphosphonates take to work?  How long should you stay on bisphosphonates?  Which bisphosphonates might I be prescribed?  How to take bisphosphonate tablets  When taking bisphosphonates  What to do if you forget to take your tablets  What are the side-effects of bisphosphonates?  Can I buy bisphosphonates?  Who should not take bisphosphonates? What are bisphosphonates?Examples of conditions which bisphosphonates can help treat are: Osteoporosis - a condition where bones become thin and more prone to fracture.Paget's disease of bone.Cancer that has spread to the bones (bone metastases from cancers such as breast cancer).Very high amounts of calcium in the blood in people who are very ill with advanced cancer.The rest of this leaflet is only about bisphosphonates for osteoporosis that your doctor may prescribe in order to prevent broken bones (fractures). See the separate leaflet called Osteoporosis to learn about this condition.How are bisphosphonates administered?The bisphosphonates that are usually prescribed for this are tablets. Those available in the UK are alendronate (the most used one), risedronate and ibandronic acid and they have various different brand names. In some circumstances, bisphosphonates can also be given by injection (intravenous bisphosphonates). The ones available in the UK for injection are ibandronic acid and zolendronic acid.How do bisphosphonates work?Bisphosphonates work by slowing down the cells which break down bone (osteoclasts). Therefore they slow down bone loss, allowing the bone cells (osteoblasts) that help to build the bone to work more effectively. They can help to strengthen bone and help to prevent it getting any weaker. People who take a bisphosphonate are less likely to break (fracture) a bone.Who should have bisphosphonates?Your doctor may prescribe a bisphosphonate if you:Have osteoporosis and have already had a broken bone (fracture). Bisphosphonates help in preventing bone fractures.Have a low bone density and your doctor thinks you are at risk of getting a bone fracture. Read more about risk factors in the leaflet called Osteoporosis.Take long courses (more than three months) of steroids (corticosteroids) - for example, prednisolone tablets. You may also be prescribed bisphosphonates if you take repeated short courses of high-dose steroids. A common side-effect of taking steroids is to cause osteoporosis. See the separate leaflet called Preventing Steroid-induced Osteoporosis.How long do bisphosphonates take to work?It takes several months for bisphosphonates to work. Usually there is an increase in bone density 6-12 months after you start taking one. This then helps to prevent breaks (fractures) and bone pain of the spine, the hip, and other bones such as the wrist. But you can still have a fracture while you are taking a bisphosphonate - they do not totally reduce the risk risk. They usually need to be taken for some years to see the full effect.How long should you stay on bisphosphonates?Not everyone agrees on how long bisphosphonates should be taken for. Most doctors recommend that a bisphosphonate be taken for at least three to five years. After this they will review you to see if you still need to take it. You may not need to continue taking a bisphosphonate. However, some people need to take a bisphosphonate for longer. Your doctor will advise.There is some evidence from studies that bisphosphonates keep working on the bone for a few years after the medicine has been stopped. It may also be that taking them for longer than five years does more harm than good. More studies are being done to find out exactly what should be recommended in terms of how long bisphosphonates should be taken.Do you need a physiotherapist?Book a private appointment with a local physio today Book now Which bisphosphonates might I be prescribed?In the UK, bisphosphonates are usually prescribed in the form of tablets:Alendronic acidUsually taken once a week, although alendronic acid is also available as a daily tablet. This is also available as a liquid for people who have difficulty swallowing the tablets, although it is much more expensive for the NHS.RisedronateRisedronate is taken usually once a week, although also available as a daily tablet.Ibandronic acidIbandronic acid is taken once a month (also available as an injection - see below).Bisphosphonate injectionsBisphosphonate injections might be used in some cases - for example, if the tablets give you too many side-effects, or if you are at greater risk of fractures:Ibandronic acidAn injection into your vein every three months. Each ibandronic acid injection takes less than a minute.Zoledronic acidThis is an infusion once a year. Zolendronic acid is slowly given into the vein over at least 15 minutes. You will need a blood test before each infusion, to check on your calcium, vitamin D, magnesium levels and kidney function. Injections are usually given by a specialist nurse.How to take bisphosphonate tabletsBisphosphonates are taken either once a day, once a week (on the same day of the week), or once a month (on the same day of the month), depending on the one prescribed. Most people take their bisphosphonate first thing in the morning before they eat or drink anything. If you take a bisphosphonate with food, or drinks other than water, only a small amount of the medicine is absorbed.You need to wait between 30 minutes and 2 hours before eating or drinking anything (other than water). The information leaflet that comes with your tablets will tell you exactly how long you should wait.You need to swallow the tablet with a full glass of water and sit upright for 30 minutes afterwards. This is because bisphosphonates can irritate the upper part of your gullet (oesophagus - the tube that takes food and drink from your mouth to your stomach).When taking bisphosphonatesSome important considerations are:What to do if you forget to take your tablets.Have regular dental check-ups.What to do if you have heartburn or difficulty swallowing.Take calcium and vitamin D tablets.Do not take certain other medicines.What to do if you forget to take your tabletsIf you are taking a once-a-day bisphosphonate: skip the missed tablet for that day and continue taking them as usual the next day.If you are taking a once-a-week bisphosphonate: take the missed tablet when you remember and take the next tablet when it is normally taken. Do not take more than two tablets on the same day.If you are taking a once-a-month bisphosphonate and you are due to take your tablet within the next seven days then do not take another tablet. Take another tablet on the day you are next due to take one.If you are taking a once-a-month bisphosphonate and you are due to take your next tablet in more than seven days then take the tablet when you remember (in the morning). Do not take two tablets within the same week.Regular dental check-upsYou must tell your dentist if you are taking a bisphosphonate. You will need to have regular dental check-ups. Also it is advisable to have a dental check-up before starting a bisphosphonate. This is because there is a very small chance that you will get a condition called osteonecrosis of the jaw.In this rare condition the jawbone does not receive enough blood and the bone starts to weaken and die. It is usually painful, but not always. In most people, this goes away after they have stopped taking their medicine.Heartburn or difficulty swallowingBisphosphonates can sometimes cause difficulty swallowing, pain when you swallow, chest pain, or new/worsened heartburn. You must stop taking the bisphosphonate and speak with your doctor if you have any of these problems. Your doctor may consider prescribing a different bisphosphonate or a different type of medicine to help prevent broken bones (fractures).Calcium and vitamin DYou need calcium and vitamin D to make bone. Many doctors will usually also prescribe calcium and vitamin D if you take a bisphosphonate. This is in order to make sure there is enough calcium and vitamin D in your body. There are quite a few calcium and vitamin D preparations. They include: a chewable tablet, an effervescent tablet, or a sachet. They can be prescribed as a combination of the two, just calcium, or just vitamin D.Your doctor will advise which one is right for you. Your doctor will ask about your diet. If you are already having enough calcium in your diet, you should not take calcium supplements as well. This is because too much calcium may be harmful for you. Calcium and vitamin D are normally taken every day (at a different time to the bisphosphonate).Taking other medicinesBisphosphonates sometimes react with other medicines that you may take. So, make sure your doctor knows of any other medicines that you are taking, including ones that you have bought rather than been prescribed. Always check with your pharmacist before you buy any painkillers from the pharmacy or supermarket. Some painkillers - for example, ibuprofen and aspirin - can irritate your gullet (oesophagus) if you take them with a bisphosphonate.What are the side-effects of bisphosphonates?The most common side-effects of bisphosphonates include:Feeling sick (nausea).Indigestion and heartburn (dyspepsia).Tummy (abdominal) pain.Diarrhoea.Constipation.These side-effects usually happen in the first month of treatment but usually go away after this and do not last long-term. The benefits of taking bisphosphonates usually outweigh the risks.Other common side-effects are joint, and/or muscle pain (usually not severe). This pain can happen a few days or a few months after you first start treatment. This pain normally goes away after you stop taking a bisphosphonate. A full list of possible side-effects (each of which will only happen to a few people) is included in the leaflet which comes with the medicine.Less common side-effectsLess commonly some people experience more serious side-effects to their gullet (oesophagus). The oesophagus is the upper part of the digestive system, the food pipe that carries food and drink from your mouth to your stomach. Sometimes bisphosphonates can cause inflammation or ulcers of the oesophagus, or a narrowing of the oesophagus.Taking the medicine carefully according to the instructions makes these side-effects less likely. As mentioned above, if you develop any symptoms such as difficulty or pain swallowing, worsening heartburn, or chest pain, you should stop the tablets and see your doctor. There have been very rare reports of bisphosphonates possibly causing cancer of the oesophagus but there is no definite evidence for this currently.Some studies have also suggested that bisphosphonates may cause an increased risk of atrial fibrillation.Rare side-effectsA rare side-effect is osteonecrosis of the jaw or ear canal (external auditory canal). This occurs when the jawbone does not receive enough blood, and the bone starts to weaken and die. You must stop taking bisphosphonates if this happens.These medicines sometimes react with other medicines that you may take. So, make sure your doctor knows of any other medicines that you are taking, including ones that you have bought rather than been prescribed.Can I buy bisphosphonates?You cannot buy bisphosphonates. They are only available from your chemist, with a doctor's prescription.Who should not take bisphosphonates?You cannot take a bisphosphonate if:You have low calcium levels in your blood (hypocalcaemia).You have uncorrected vitamin D deficiency.You are pregnant or breastfeeding.Your kidneys do not work very well.You cannot sit upright or stand for 30 minutes after you have taken the tablet.You have structural problems with your gullet (oesophagus) which slows down the length of time it takes for the bisphosphonate to reach your stomach. Examples of these include: a narrowing of the oesophagus, or Barrett's oesophagus.In addition, you may not be able to take a bisphosphonate if you have a recent history of tummy problems such as stomach ulcers, duodenal ulcers or inflammation of the upper gut.How to use the Yellow Card SchemeIf you think you have had a side-effect to one of your medicines you can report this on the Yellow Card Scheme. You can do this online at www.mhra.gov.uk/yellowcard.The Yellow Card Scheme is used to make pharmacists, doctors and nurses aware of any new side-effects that medicines or any other healthcare products may have caused. If you wish to report a side-effect, you will need to provide basic information about:The side-effect.The name of the medicine which you think caused it.The person who had the side-effect.Your contact details as the reporter of the side-effect.It is helpful if you have your medication - and/or the leaflet that came with it - with you while you fill out the report.Previous article   DXA Scan Next article  Calcium-rich Food  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Clinical guideline for the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis; National Osteoporosis Guideline Group (updated September 2021)Osteoporosis: assessing the risk of fragility fracture; NICE Clinical Guideline (August 2012, updated February 2017)Management of osteoporosis and the prevention of fragility fractures - A national clinical guideline; Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN - January 2021)Bisphosphonates for treating osteoporosis; NICE Technology appraisal guidance, August 2017 - last updated July 2019Allen CS, Yeung JH, Vandermeer B, et al; Bisphosphonates for steroid-induced osteoporosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Oct 510:CD001347. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001347.pub2.British National Formulary (BNF); NICE Evidence Services (UK access only)Related InformationOsteoporosisAlendronic acid for osteoporosis (Fosamax, Binosto)Risedronate sodium tablets (Actonel)Zoledronic acid (Aclasta, Zerlinda, Zometa)Ibandronic acid (Bondronat, Bonviva)  How to boost your vitamin D levels this winter    8 minutes reading time  16-Nov-23  Chemical found in soap and toothpaste linked to osteoporosis     2 minutes reading time  26-Jun-19  Why the menopause may cause osteoporosis    4 minutes reading time  18-Oct-17  Why clean eating could be bad for your bones    5 minutes reading time  14-Dec-17  hello , I was referred for a dexa scan after a relatively minor fall resulted in serious fractures of my Tibia Fibula and 4 Metatarsals . I had extensive surgery to fix my bones with plates and...   maria5555Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Authored by   Jenny Whitehall  Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy Document ID  13772 (v4)  Originally published on   18 November 2011  Last updated on   16 March 2023 Next review date  14 March 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  DXA ScanNext article Calcium-rich Food Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Bisphosphonates: how do bisphosphonates work?     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/bones-joints-muscles/osteoporosis-leaflet/bisphosphonatesCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up

