# Blisters on Feet: Causes, Treatment, and Prevention | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Foot Care  Foot Blisters Blisters on Feet Last updated by Dr Pippa Vincent   Authored by Dr Mary Lowth   Peer reviewed by Dr Surangi Mendis  Last updated 24 Apr 2023   Originally published 23 Apr 2015   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsBlisters are small pockets of fluid that develop most often on the feet and are normally caused by a mixture of friction and pressure. They are very common and can be painful.In this article   What is a blister?   What causes blisters on feet?   Should you pop a blister?   How to treat blisters on feet   Complications of foot blisters   How to prevent blisters on feet In This Article     Foot BlistersBlisters on FeetIn this article What is a blister?  What causes blisters on feet?  Should you pop a blister?  How to treat blisters on feet  Complications of foot blisters  How to prevent blisters on feet What is a blister?A blister is a fluid pocket in the skin which develops when the upper skin layers separate and the space between them fills with serum. Serum is the liquid part of the blood - it contains protective substances like antibodies.The appearance is of a bubble on the skin. Sometimes a small blood vessel will bleed into the bubble (blood blister) in which case, rather than being clear, it will be red. Occasionally the contents of a blister will become infected and the the blister may then contain pus.Most blister formation is a self-defence strategy by the body. The purpose is to protect the skin beneath from further injury and to encourage fast healing. The associated pain also has a protective effect. Blisters result from pressure and friction and the activity causing them is less likely to continue if they become increasingly painful.What causes blisters on feet?Blisters are most common on the feet and ankles as these are the areas most subject to pressure in most people.Generally blisters may be caused by:Friction - the most common cause in the feet.Direct damage to the skin by corrosive substances or heat.Some infectious diseases (for example, chickenpox).Some inherited diseases (for example, pompholyx).Allergic reaction.This leaflet focuses on foot blisters caused by friction. Areas of the foot will suffer repeated friction where there are:Poorly fitting or rigid shoes which rub on walking.High heels (which force pressure on to a small area of the foot, often the ball of the foot).Hot or moist feet which result in the skin being more vulnerable.Ill fitting socks or socks with wrinkles.Shoes being worn without socks.Abnormalities of foot shape which can affect shoe fit.Additionally blisters on feet will be more likely to form if someone:Is walking or running for a long time, particularly with any of the factors above.Is walking or running in uncomfortable shoes whilst carrying weight (for example, shopping or luggage).Has a condition causing reduced sensation in the feet (for example, diabetes or peripheral neuropathy). If theycan't feel pain in the feet, they are more likely to carry on without realising when something is rubbing.Should you pop a blister?The general rule with blisters is do not pop or drain them. Popping the blister makes a hole in the skin (which wasn't there before). This not only removes the protective effect of the blister but opens the area up to infection. Popped blisters are often more painful too as the nerves in the skin beneath are more exposed.It is particularly important to try to keep the blister intact if any of the following apply, as these conditions make people more prone to infection and worsening damage to feet:Diabetes.Heart failure.Peripheral arterial disease.Swollen legs with venous ulcers.Conditions reducing your immunity, such as HIV.People taking steroid tablets.As with every rule there are exceptions. A blister may need to be popped if it is large and affecting the ability to wear shoes. It may be better to pop it if it is so tense that it is likely to pop by itself on wearing shoes. A controlled de-pressurisation of the blister may then make a smaller hole in the skin than if shoes rubbed the dome of the blister off completely.How to treat blisters on feetMost blisters will heal by themselves and the blister fluid will be gradually re-absorbed as the skin beneath heals. This healing can be sped up by:Removing the cause - wearing different shoes and spending time barefoot if possible.Keeping the area clean and dry.Wearing well-fitting socks with shoes.If the blister is small - up to the size of a pea - a protective dressing will stop it breaking. The top layer of the blister then protects the skin beneath whilst it heals.If the blister is on the underside of the foot it is helpful to make a protective blister dressing using a moleskin pad with a hole cut in the middle like a doughnut. This takes the pressure off the blister and prevents the top from rubbing off.Commercial blister plasters can be very helpful and come in a number of sizes and shapes. These should be applied according to the instructions. They should not be removed until they drop off (this can take a week or longer), as they function as a 'second skin' until the blister has healed. An added advantage of this method for those on walking trips is that they can then continue their journey without doing further damage.If the blister is large and tense and will clearly burst on its own, it may be advisable to pop it (but with the cautions above).In this case the principle of draining the blister is to make as small a hole as possible in a sterile manner. The top of the blister should ideally be preserved to act as protection for the skin beneath. This can be done by:Washing hands with warm water and antibacterial soap.Sterilising a needle or pin - for example, in a flame and then letting it cool or by wiping it with an alcohol wipe.Gently puncturing the blister towards the edge.Gently letting or squeezing the fluid out - the dome will collapse and sit on the skin beneath.Applying an antiseptic cream (such as Savlon®) if possible,Applying a clean dressing and changing it if it gets wet or dirty.Avoiding getting the area wet for at least 24 hours. This will allow the skin from the top of the blister to have a chance to 'fuse' on to the skin beneath.If a blister has already burst, it should be:Washed with soap and water.Dealt with as follows: the skin flap should be smoothed down if possible,unless it's very dirty or there is pus under it, in which case it won't stick and may be better removed.Covered with a dressing (and antiseptic cream applied if possible).Treat as above.When your blister is healing it should be monitored for signs of infection which might include:Increasing pain.Increasing or spreading redness.Pus on or around the blister.Swelling and heat.A high temperature (fever).Complications of foot blistersMost friction blisters heal naturally and quickly. Possible complications include:Infection, which could spread. See the separate leaflet called Wound Infection.Ulcer formation (particularly likely if sensation or circulation is poor, as in diabetes, peripheral arterial disease and neuropathy). See the separate leaflet called Diabetes, Foot Care and Foot Ulcers.How to prevent blisters on feetBlisters on feet can be prevented by reducing the friction that causes them. This can be helped by:Wearing comfortable, well-fitting shoes and clean socks.'Breaking in' new shoes, including running or walking shoes, gradually.Sensible shoe choice. Shoes such as high heels and dress shoes are more likely to lead to blistering, so wear these for shorter periods.Stopping activity as soon as possible if a pressure point starts to rub, and removing/changing shoes.Wearing moisture-wicking socks, or changing socks frequently which helps prevent moisture build-up if you tend to get sweaty feet. Sports socks can help keep feet drier.Ensuring that shoes or hiking boots have been properly broken in before a long walk.Taping a protective layer of padding between the affected area and the footwear if shoes are rubbing when out and about and can't be removed. This can prevent the formation of a blister. A friction-management patch applied to the shoe will remain in place much longer. This can be helpful with speciality shoes and boots like ice skates and inline skates, and with orthotic braces and splints.Putting a lubricant like talcum powder inside the shoes may also reduce friction in the short term. However, because the talc absorbs moisture, it can make things worse in the long term.Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Friction blister; DermNet NZRushton R, Richie D; Friction blisters on the feet: A critical assessment of current prevention strategies. J Athl Train. 2023 Jan 27. doi: 10.4085/1062-6050-0341.22.Related InformationAgeing FeetBroken ToeFoot DropDo your feet get smellier in winter?  How to keep your feet healthy this summer    5 minutes reading time  25-Apr-18  I'm three weeks out from plantar plate repair with 2nd toe osteotomy. I'm not taking any pain medication at this point, but I'm concerned because I still get throbbing pains in my second toe and...   ambceb69158Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Authored by   Dr Mary Lowth  Last updated by   Dr Pippa Vincent Peer reviewed by  Dr Surangi Mendis Document ID  29044 (v3)  Originally published on   23 April 2015  Last updated on   24 April 2023 Next review date  22 April 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Blisters on Feet: Causes, Treatment, and Prevention     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/foot-care/foot-blistersCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


