# Blood Cancers: Types, Symptoms, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Professional Articles    Haematology  Blood Cancers Last updated by Dr Surangi Mendis, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Rosalyn Adleman, MRCGP  Last updated 11 Sep 2023         Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsThis article is for Medical Professionals  Professional Reference articles are designed for health professionals to use. They are written by UK doctors and based on research evidence, UK and European Guidelines. You may find one of our health articles more useful.Read COVID-19 guidance from NICE  Treatment of almost all medical conditions has been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. NICE has issued rapid update guidelines in relation to many of these. This guidance is changing frequently. Please visit https://www.nice.org.uk/covid-19 to see if there is temporary guidance issued by NICE in relation to the management of this condition, which may vary from the information given below.In this article   Types of blood cancer   Leukaemia   Lymphoma   Myeloma   Polycythaemia vera   Investigation of blood cancers   Treatment of blood cancers In This Article     Blood CancersIn this article Types of blood cancer  Leukaemia  Lymphoma  Myeloma  Polycythaemia vera  Investigation of blood cancers  Treatment of blood cancers Types of blood cancerThe three main types of blood cancer are:Leukaemia (involving white cells).Myeloma (involving red cells).Lymphoma (involving the lymphatic system).Symptomatology may be related to the abnormal synthesis or function of blood cells or to the accumulation of abnormal cells in various organs or tissues.LeukaemiaSee also Childhood Leukaemias.There are several leukaemia types, categorised according to speed of onset (acute or chronic) and stem cell type (eg, myeloid or lymphoid).Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML)[1] AML is the most common acute leukaemia in adults. Most subtypes show >30% blast cells of myeloid lineage in the blood, bone marrow, or both.AML is a genetically heterogeneous disease. Genomic advances have enabled a categorisation based on molecular genetics.Median onset age is 67.Identified risk factors include myelodysplastic disorders, some congenital disorders (eg, Down's syndrome, neurofibromatosis), and benzene exposure.Presentation is related to organ infiltration or bone marrow failure. Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, pallor and petechiae are common findings.Prognosis depends on the burden of disease, age and cell type.See Acute Myeloid Leukaemia article.Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL)[2]ALL occurs when a clone of cells from lymphoid progenitor cells undergoes malignant change. The abnormal cells grow, replacing normal cells in the bone marrow. Immature leukoblasts also pour into the peripheral circulation.The peak incidence is 2-4 years and ALL represents 80% of childhood cases of leukaemia. Genetic and environmental risk factors have been identified, and an association with viral infections.The clinical picture is usually one of rapid deterioration, with early nonspecific symptoms of fatigue, malaise, headache and fever. Later, bone marrow failure occurs with haemorrhagic or thrombotic complications, recurrent infections and bone pain.See Acute Lymphoblastic Leukaemia article.Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL)[3]CLL is a malignant proliferation of B lymphocytes. These accumulate in various tissues, including the blood, bone marrow, liver and spleen. They are functionally immature, leading to immune deficiency.CLL is principally a disease of older people, representing a quarter of all leukaemias. The median diagnosis age is 72 years.There is an increased incidence in first-degree relatives but the genetic basis is unknown.The condition is usually associated with a long overall survival.See Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia article.Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML)[4]CML can affect one or all of the haemopoietic stem cell lines (erythroid, platelet and myeloid). A cytogenic abnormality known as the Philadelphia chromosome is responsible for 90% of cases.It can occur at any age but is rare in children, It causes 15% of all adult leukaemias and the median diagnosis age is 60-65 years.See Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia article.LymphomaHodgkin's lymphoma[5]This is a lymphatic system malignant tumour. The characteristic histological findings are multinucleated giant cells (Reed-Sternberg cells) and smaller mononuclear cells derived from B lymphocytes, in the germinal centres of lymphoid tissue.Peak incidence is in young adults aged 20-34. Risk factors include infection with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), HIV, immunosuppression and cigarette smoking.The most common presentation is with enlarged but painless lymph nodes in the neck or supraclavicular region. Systemic symptoms such as night sweats or weight loss may be present.See Hodgkin's Lymphoma article.Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL)[6]NHL is a heterogeneous group of myeloproliferative malignancies. They are divided into low-grade or high-grade, depending on their natural history and treatment response.NHLs have been classified by the World Health Organization (WHO) into subtypes according to clinical presentation and histology.NHL is five times more common than Hodgkin's lymphoma.Median presentation age is >50 years; some types occasionally occur in children or young adults.Risk factors include chromosomal abnormalities, some viral infections, environmental factors, congenital and acquired immune deficiency states, autoimmune disorders and Helicobacter pylori infection.Lymphadenopathy and organomegaly are the predominate presenting features.See Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma article.Mycosis fungoides and cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCLs)[7]CTCLs are classified by WHO by their clinical behaviour into indolent or aggressive.Median presentation age is 55-60 years. Mycosis fungoides is the most common type. The typical presentation is with patches and plaques on the skin. Visceral tumours may present later.See our Mycosis Fungoides and Cutaneous T-cell Lymphomas article.Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma[8]MALT lymphomas are a type of NHL. They are found in mucosa rather than lymph nodes. They are subdivided into gastric (associated with H. pylori) and non-gastric (found in head, lung, neck and eye and not associated with H. pylori).They are associated with a variety of infections, autoimmune disease and chromosomal abnormalities. They are mostly slow-growing and remain localised for long periods.See Mucosa-associated Lymphoid Tissue (MALT) Lymphoma article.Waldenström's macroglobulinaemia [9]This is a lymphoproliferative disorder of B cells, causing infiltration of bone marrow with lymphoplasmacytic cells. Median presentation age is >70 years. Aetiology is unknown but may be related to viral infections, autoimmune conditions or chromosome abnormalities.Symptomatology is variable and depends on which organ systems are involved.Median survival is about 60 months.Burkitt's lymphoma[10]Rapidly growing, this is high-grade B-cell NHL. There are endemic and sporadic forms - both associated with EBV. Chromosome abnormalities have been demonstrated in both types. A third type is linked to HIV infection and use of immunosuppressive drugs.Children are most commonly affected. The endemic form commonly presents with a tumour of maxilla and/or mandible; abdominal organs may also be involved.The sporadic type mainly involves abdominal organs. Prognosis may be good if the condition is treated before spreading.See Burkitt's Lymphoma article.Myeloma [11]Myeloma is a malignant proliferation of plasma cells, caused by genetic mutations. Median presentation age is 70 years. Presenting features may include renal failure, bone pain, anaemia and hypercalcaemia.Myeloma is chronic, relapsing and remitting. In high-risk disease, death occurs within two years. Advances in treatment have led to some patients surviving beyond 8 years.See Myeloma article.Polycythaemia vera[12]A proliferative myeloid disorder caused by a somatic mutation in a haemopoietic stem cell, this is predominantly associated with erythroid hyperplasia, but also myeloid leukocytosis, thrombocytosis and splenomegaly.Median diagnosis age is 65-74 years. It may be discovered incidentally on routine blood testing, or with headache, dizziness and sweating symptoms. It can be associated with Budd-Chiari syndrome or pruritus. It can progress to myelofibrosis or AML.Survival without treatment is 6-18 months. With treatment, median survival rate is about 14 years.See Polycythaemia Vera article.Investigation of blood cancersInvestigation often involves examination of a peripheral blood film, bone marrow biopsy, cytogenetic studies, CXR and CT scans. Other investigations depend on the individual condition and the need to exclude other conditions.Treatment of blood cancersThis depends on the individual condition but often involves a period of remission induction, followed by maintenance therapy. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy are frequently the mainstays of treatment.Stem cell transplant may be indicated in selected cases. Surgery may also be helpful, particularly where organomegaly is a feature.Newer treatments include immunotherapy and targeted therapies such as monoclonal antibodies, tyrosine kinase inhibitors and growth factor receptor inhibitors.Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/haematological-cancers-recognition-referral/Heuser M, Ofran Y, Boissel N, et al; Acute myeloid leukaemia in adult patients: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2020 Jun31(6):697-712. doi: 10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018. Epub 2020 Mar 17.Terwilliger T, Abdul-Hay M; Acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a comprehensive review and 2017 update. Blood Cancer J. 2017 Jun 307(6):e577. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2017.53.Schuh AH, Parry-Jones N, Appleby N, et al; Guideline for the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia: A British Society for Haematology Guideline. Br J Haematol. 2018 Jul 15. doi: 10.1111/bjh.15460.Jabbour E, Kantarjian H; Chronic myeloid leukemia: 2018 update on diagnosis, therapy and monitoring. Am J Hematol. 2018 Mar93(3):442-459. doi: 10.1002/ajh.25011.Ansell SM; Hodgkin lymphoma: 2018 update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and management. Am J Hematol. 2018 May93(5):704-715. doi: 10.1002/ajh.25071.Ansell SM; Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma: Diagnosis and Treatment. Mayo Clin Proc. 2015 Aug90(8):1152-63. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2015.04.025.Bagherani N, Smoller BR; An overview of cutaneous T cell lymphomas. F1000Res. 2016 Jul 285. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.8829.1. eCollection 2016.Bertoni F, Coiffier B, Salles G, et al; MALT lymphomas: pathogenesis can drive treatment. Oncology (Williston Park). 2011 Nov 1525(12):1134-42, 1147.Kastritis E, Leblond V, Dimopoulos MA, et al; Waldenstrom's macroglobulinaemia: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2018 Oct 129(Suppl 4):iv270. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdy322.Dozzo M, Carobolante F, Donisi PM, et al; Burkitt lymphoma in adolescents and young adults: management challenges. Adolesc Health Med Ther. 2016 Dec 238:11-29. doi: 10.2147/AHMT.S94170. eCollection 2017.Multiple myeloma: diagnosis, treatment and follow-up; ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline (2021).McMullin MF, Harrison CN, Ali S, et al; A guideline for the diagnosis and management of polycythaemia vera. A British Society for Haematology Guideline. Br J Haematol. 2019 Jan184(2):176-191. doi: 10.1111/bjh.15648. Epub 2018 Nov 27.Related InformationWhat are the early warning signs of blood cancer? Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Surangi Mendis, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Rosalyn Adleman, MRCGP Document ID  30802 (v2)  Last updated on   11 September 2023 Next review date  09 September 2028 Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Blood Cancers     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/doctor/blood-cancersCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


