# Blood Glucose Test (Blood Sugar) and HbA1c | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Diabetes    Diabetes  Blood Glucose Test (Blood Sugar) and HbA1c Last updated by Dr Rosalyn Adleman, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP  Last updated 19 Jul 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Diabetes      Diabetes and High Blood Pressure      Diabetes Foot Care      Diabetic Kidney Disease      Diabetic Neuropathy      Diabetic Amyotrophy In this series     Diabetes      Diabetes and High Blood Pressure      Diabetes Foot Care      Diabetic Kidney Disease      Diabetic Neuropathy      Diabetic Amyotrophy Blood sugar (glucose) measurements are used to diagnose diabetes. They are also used to monitor glucose control for those people who are already known to have diabetes.In this article   Blood glucose tests (blood sugar)   Home monitoring   Urine test for sugar (glucose) In This Article     Blood Glucose Test (Blood Sugar) and HbA1cIn this article Blood glucose tests (blood sugar)  Home monitoring  Urine test for sugar (glucose) What should my blood sugar level be?Dr Partha Kar, FRCPIf your glucose level is high and remains high then you have diabetes. If the level goes too low then it is called hypoglycaemia.The main tests for measuring the amount of glucose in the blood are:Random blood glucose level.Fasting blood glucose level.The HbA1c blood test.Oral glucose tolerance test.Capillary blood glucose (home monitoring).Urine test for sugar (glucose).Blood glucose tests (blood sugar)Random blood glucose levelA sample of blood taken at any time can be a useful test if diabetes is suspected. A level of 11.1 mmol/L or more in the blood sample indicates that you have diabetes. A fasting blood glucose test may be done to confirm the diagnosis.Fasting blood glucose levelA glucose level below 11.1 mmol/L on a random blood sample does not rule out diabetes. A blood test taken in the morning before you eat anything is a more accurate test. Do not eat or drink anything except water for 8-10 hours before a fasting blood glucose test. A level of 7.0 mmol/L or more indicates that you have diabetes.If you have no symptoms of diabetes but the blood test shows a glucose level of 7.0 mmol/L or more, the blood test should be repeated to confirm you have diabetes. If you do have symptoms and the blood test shows a glucose level of 7.0 mmol/L or more, the test does not need to be repeated. See the separate leaflets called Type 1 Diabetes and Type 2 Diabetes for more details.Oral glucose tolerance testThis test may be done to check whether a woman has developed diabetes associated with pregnancy (gestational diabetes). It is sometimes also done if it is thought that your body doesn't control glucose levels normally but not badly enough to be called diabetes. This is referred to as pre-diabetes (also called impaired glucose tolerance or non-diabetic hyperglycaemia). The oral glucose tolerance test is not now usually used to diagnose diabetes.For this test, you fast overnight. In the morning you are given a drink which contains 75g of glucose. A blood sample is taken two hours later. Normally, your body should be able to deal with the glucose and your blood level should not go too high. A glucose level of 11.1 mmol/L or more in the blood sample taken after two hours indicates that you have diabetes. See the separate leaflet called Glucose Tolerance Test for more details.The HbA1c blood testIf you have diabetes, your HbA1c level may be done every 2-6 months by your doctor or nurse. This test measures your recent average blood sugar (glucose) level. Because it is an average measurement you do NOT need to fast on the day of the test. The test measures a part of the red blood cells. Glucose in the blood attaches to part of the red blood cells. This part can be measured and gives a good indication of your average blood glucose over the previous 2-3 months.In the UK, HbA1c results are expressed in mmol/mol. This is in line with the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry. The non-diabetic, 'normal' range is 20-42 mmol/mol.In the UK HbA1c results used to be expressed in percentages in line with the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT). The non-diabetic 'normal' range is 4-6%.As some places still use the old-style percentages, a comparison chart is shown below.Comparing DCCT-HbA1c and IFCC-HbA1c Results DCCT-HbA1c (%)IFCC-HbA1c (mmol/mol)6.0426.5487.0537.5598.0649.075For people with diabetes, treatment aims to lower the HbA1c level to below a target level which is usually agreed between you and your doctor at regular check-ups. Ideally, the aim is to maintain your HbA1c to less than 48 mmol/mol (6.5%). However, this may not always be possible to achieve and the target level of HbA1c should be agreed on an individual basis between you and your doctor. (For example, by increasing the dose of medication, improving your diet, etc.)The HbA1c test can also be used as a test to diagnose diabetes. An HbA1c value of 48 mmol/mol (6.5%) or above is the blood level for diagnosing diabetes. People with an HbA1c level of 42-47 mmol/mol (6.0-6.5%) are at increased risk of diabetes and cardiovascular disease. This is called pre-diabetes or non-diabetic hyperglycaemia or impaired glucose tolerance). See the separate leaflet called Pre-diabetes (Impaired Glucose Tolerance) for more details.Home monitoringA drop of blood from a finger prick is placed on a test strip which contains a chemical that reacts with glucose. By using a colour chart or a small glucose meter machine, the blood level of glucose can be measured quickly. Home glucose monitoring is very important for any person with diabetes who needs insulin treatment. In this situation, it is usually recommended to check the blood glucose several times a day.New devices called flash glucose monitors or continuous glucose monitors can be worn by diabetics. These allow them to check their blood glucose very frequently without pricking their finger.Urine test for sugar (glucose)Urine (produced by the kidneys) does not normally contain glucose. The kidneys filter our blood, keeping substances the body needs, while getting rid of waste products. Your kidneys constantly reabsorb glucose so that it doesn't enter your urine. However, if the glucose level goes above a certain level, the kidneys can't reabsorb all of the glucose. This means that some glucose will 'spill' through the kidneys into the urine.A simple urine dipstick test can detect glucose in a sample of urine. In a dipstick test a doctor or nurse uses a special chemical strip which he/she dips into a sample of your urine. Colour changes on the strip show whether there is glucose in the urine sample. If you have glucose in your urine, you are likely to have diabetes.However, some people have kidneys that are more 'leaky' and glucose may leak into urine with a normal blood level. Therefore, if your urine contains any glucose, you should have a blood test to measure the blood level of glucose to confirm, or rule out, diabetes.Previous article   Diabetic AmyotrophyAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Management of diabetes; Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network - SIGN (March 2010 - updated November 2017)Diabetes (type 1 and type 2) in children and young people: diagnosis and management; NICE Guidelines (Aug 2015 - updated May 2023)Diabetic foot problems: prevention and management; NICE Guidelines (August 2015 - last updated October 2019)Type 2 diabetes in adults: management; NICE Guidance (December 2015 - last updated June 2022)Type 1 diabetes in adults: diagnosis and management; NICE Guidelines (August 2015 - last updated August 2022)Diabetes UKRelated InformationGlycated Haemoglobin (HbA1c) ProAntihyperglycaemic Agents Used for Type 2 Diabetes ProDiabetes and Intercurrent Illness ProPrecautions for Patients with Diabetes Undergoing Surgery ProDiabetes Mellitus Pro  How to eat out with diabetes    4 minutes reading time  24-Jan-24  Can you claim disability benefits if you have diabetes?    5 minutes reading time  21-Sep-23  Is having diabetes a disability?    5 minutes reading time  28-Sep-17 Sponsored  Can apps really help with diabetes management?    6 minutes reading time  30-Mar-21  My sugar is high in a morning. Is there any advice.I'd appreciate your feed back.   jeannie37469Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Rosalyn Adleman, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Document ID  4786 (v44)  Last updated on   19 July 2023 Next review date  17 July 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Diabetic AmyotrophyHealth informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Blood Glucose Test (Blood Sugar) and HbA1c     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/diabetes/diabetes-mellitus-leaflet/tests-for-blood-sugar-glucose-and-hba1c?xnpe_tifc=bDUsxIH8xI1pOk4.h.H7bjpJRfn-b.xdOIPubIzAb.VZ4NllxuhutfYDxFbAxkbJxIP_4FVpx.oZrkbZ4dnlbD_X4I_pbDY8h.VTCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


