# Bowel Cancer Screening: Signs & Symptoms | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Cancer    Bowel Cancer (Colon and Rectal)  Bowel Cancer Screening Last updated by Dr Hayley Willacy   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 19 Jul 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Bowel Cancer (Colon and Rectal)      Faecal Immunochemical Test (Faecal Occult Blood Test)      Sigmoidoscopy      Colonoscopy      Bowel Polyps (Colonic Polyps)      CT Colonography In this series     Bowel Cancer (Colon and Rectal)      Faecal Immunochemical Test (Faecal Occult Blood Test)      Sigmoidoscopy      Colonoscopy      Bowel Polyps (Colonic Polyps)      CT Colonography Bowel (colorectal) cancer is common. The outlook (prognosis) and chance of cure are much better if this cancer is detected at an early stage rather than at a later stage. A screening programme operates in the UK for certain age groups.The aim is to offer an easy screening test to detect bowel cancer when it is at an early stage and before symptoms start. Some people outside the normal screening age who have a high risk of developing bowel cancer are offered extra screening tests.In this article   What is bowel cancer screening?   Who is offered bowel cancer screening?   Bowel cancer screening kits   Bowel cancer screening with flexible sigmoidoscopy   Bowel cancer screening tests for younger people with increased risk In This Article     Bowel Cancer ScreeningIn this article What is bowel cancer screening?  Who is offered bowel cancer screening?  Bowel cancer screening kits  Bowel cancer screening with flexible sigmoidoscopy  Bowel cancer screening tests for younger people with increased risk See the separate leaflet called Colon, Rectal and Bowel Cancer (Colorectal Cancer).What is bowel cancer screening?Screening means looking for early signs of a particular disease in otherwise healthy people who do not have any symptoms. If certain diseases are picked up early, the disease can be cured.Bowel cancer screening aims to detect bowel cancer at an early stage when there is a good chance that treatment will cure the cancer. There are two methods of screening for bowel cancer:A test to detect traces of blood in your stools (faeces). This is called the faecal immunochemical test (FIT).An examination of the inside of the bowel by a test called flexible sigmoidoscopy. Our picks for Bowel Cancer Screening 6 ways to reduce your risk of bowel cancerBowel cancer is the second most common cause of cancer death in the UK, accounting for 10% of al...   6min  6 ways to reduce your risk of bowel cancer   6min  What is the treatment for bowel cancer?   8min  What are the early warning signs of bowel cancer?   4min  What causes bowel cancer?   7minWho is offered bowel cancer screening?Across the UK, everyone between the ages of 60 and 74 are eligible for bowel cancer screening. However, for those under 60 the NHS bowel cancer screening programme is different across England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.EnglandIf you're between 60 and 74 years, you'll automatically be invited to use a home testing kit (a faecal immunochemistry kit or FIT) every two years.The screening is expanding to those aged 50-59 years and is being rolled out from April 2021 over a 4 year period.In most but not yet all areas, anyone aged 55 is invited for a one-off screening with flexible sigmoidoscopy.If you're aged 75 or over, you can ask for a home testing kit every two years by calling the bowel cancer screening helpline on 0800 707 60 60.ScotlandIf you're between 50 and 74 years, you'll automatically be invited to use a home testing kit (a faecal immunochemistry kit or FIT) every two years.People aged over 74, can request a screening kit by contacting the bowel cancer screening programme on 0800 012 1833.WalesIf you're between 55 and 74 years, you'll automatically be invited to use a home testing kit (a faecal immunochemistry kit or FIT) every two years.The screening is being expanded to those aged 50-54 years over the coming years.For more information you can contact the Bowel screening Wales helpline on 0800 294 3370.Northern IrelandIf you're between 60 and 74 years, you'll automatically be invited to use a home testing kit (a faecal immunochemistry kit or FIT) every two years.For more information about the bowel cancer screening programme in Northern Ireland contact the helpline on 0800 015 2514.FIT screening replaced the old faecal occult blood (FOB) test from June 2019 in Wales and from later in 2019 in England. The FIT is easier to use than the FOB and is more accurate in detecting potential cancers.When should I screen for bowel cancer?The American Cancer Society recommends that people who do not have an increased risk of colon cancer start regular screening at age 45. This can be done either with a stool-based test, or with a test that looks at the colon and rectum - a bowel scope.People who are in good health with a life expectancy of more than 10 years should continue regular colorectal cancer screening through the age of 75. Between 76 and 85 years, the decision to be screened should be based on a person's preferences, life expectancy, overall health, and prior screening history. People over 85 should no longer have colorectal cancer screening.Bowel cancer screening kitsFaecal immunochemical home testThe FIT kit consists of a small plastic container with a stick attached to the lid. People collect samples using the following steps.Scrape the tip of the stick along the bowel motion.Put the stick back into the bottle.Click the bottle shut.Put the used kit into the return freepost packaging and send for analysis.You will get one of two screening results. These are:Normal result: no significant level of blood detected.Abnormal result: blood detected and the individual is offered an appointment to discuss having a colonoscopy.A colonoscopy is a test in which a long, thin, flexible telescope (a colonoscope) is passed through your back passage (rectum) into your large bowel (colon). In this way the whole of your colon and rectum can be looked at in detail. An alternative to colonoscopy is a CT colonography.Results will be sent to participants within two weeks of the kit arriving for analysis. Your GP will be notified of all test results.There are various reasons other than bowel cancer for having a positive test. For example, some medical conditions including piles (haemorrhoids) can lead to a positive test. Most people with a positive test will NOT have bowel cancer.Bowel cancer screening can also detect growths (polyps) on the inner lining of the bowel. These are not cancers but may develop into cancers over time. They can easily be removed, which makes it less likely that bowel cancer will develop.Following a colonoscopy after screening:About 5 in 10 people who have a colonoscopy will have a normal result.About 4 in 10 will be found to have a polyp, which if removed may prevent bowel cancer from developing.About 1 in 10 people will be found to have bowel cancer.Note: a normal test result does not completely rule out bowel cancer. It is therefore important to be aware of the symptoms of bowel cancer and to see your doctor if you are concerned.Bowel cancer screening with flexible sigmoidoscopyWhat is flexible sigmoidoscopy?The sigmoid colon is the final portion of the large bowel (colon) which is joined to the back passage (rectum). A flexible sigmoidoscope is a small bendy tube with an attached light source, about the thickness of a pen. See also the separate leaflet called Sigmoidoscopy.What is screening with flexible sigmoidoscopy?It has been proposed that a routine flexible sigmoidoscopy test should be offered to all adults around the age of 55. This is because most bowel polyps and bowel cancers develop in the rectum, sigmoid colon or lower descending colon.Bowel (colonic) polyps are small non-cancerous (benign) growths on the inside lining of the colon or rectum. They get more common as we become older. They usually cause no symptoms or problems. However, if a polyp is found, it is usually removed. This is because there is a small risk of a colonic polyp developing into a bowel cancer after several years.Bowel cancer screening tests for younger people with increased riskSome people have a higher than normal risk of developing bowel cancer. This is because some diseases cause an increased risk of developing bowel cancer. Also, relatives of people with certain diseases have an increased risk of developing bowel cancer.Therefore, some people are offered regular screening tests, often from a young age. The tests done are different from the regular screening programme. These groups of people offered extra screening tests include:People with certain inherited conditions. These are rare conditions. They include:Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP).Hereditary non-polyposis bowel cancer (HNPCC).Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.Juvenile polyposis syndrome.Close relatives of people with FAP or HNPCC.People with a strong family history of first-degree relatives (mother, father, brother, sister, child) who have had bowel cancer. In particular, if the cancer developed in a close relative under the age of 45 years.People with ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease affecting the large bowel (colon) or back passage (rectum).People with a condition called acromegaly.People who have had one or more bowel growths (polyps) removed.People who have had bowel cancer in the past.The age at which screening starts, the type of tests offered and the frequency of the tests depend on the level of increased risk. The different diseases and family associations mentioned above have varying levels of risk. The tests may include regular colonoscopy or some specialised scans.If you have a disease or family history that causes an increased risk of developing bowel cancer, your doctor will advise on the type of tests recommended and their frequency. The British Society of Gastroenterology guidelines in 'Further Reading and References' below may also be of interest.Previous article   Bowel Cancer (Colon and Rectal) Next article  Faecal Immunochemical Test (Faecal Occult Blood Test)  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  NHS Bowel Cancer Screening ProgrammeNHS bowel cancer screening (BCSP) programme; GOV.UK. January 2015, last updated March 2021.Colonoscopic surveillance for prevention of colorectal cancer in people with ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease or adenomas; NICE Clinical Guideline (March 2011 - last updated September 2022)Bowel cancer statistics; Cancer Research UKBowel screening; NICE CKS, May 2019 (UK access only)Related InformationBowel Cancer (Colon and Rectal)ColonoscopySigmoidoscopyCT ColonographyBarium Enema  6 ways to reduce your risk of bowel cancer    6 minutes reading time  11-Sep-23  What is the treatment for bowel cancer?    8 minutes reading time  25-May-23  What are the symptoms of bowel cancer?    14 minutes reading time  12-May-23  How do we screen for bowel cancer?    4 minutes reading time  10-Nov-22  Hello everyone, I'm a 31-year-old male reaching out for some insights regarding my current health worries to do with bowel cancer. For the past 2-3 years, possibly longer, I've been experiencing...   ChrisdavrJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Hayley Willacy Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  9335 (v9)  Last updated on   19 July 2023 Next review date  17 July 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Bowel Cancer (Colon and Rectal)Next article Faecal Immunochemical Test (Faecal Occult Blood Test) Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Bowel Cancer Screening: Signs & Symptoms     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/cancer/colon-rectal-bowel-cancer-colorectal/bowel-cancer-screeningCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


