# Can probiotics improve your IBS symptoms? | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)    Features  Added to  Saved itemsProbiotics for IBS: do they work?        Save       Remove from Saved       Print      Share      FeedbackFrom your work life to your sex life, having irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) can cause disruption and inconvenience. Can probiotics for IBS help to reduce these symptoms, and which probiotic supplements can you trust? Last updated by Amberley Davis   Peer reviewed by Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGP  Last updated 14 Feb 2024 8 mins readIrritable bowel syndromeIf irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is affecting your quality of life then you're not alone. Symptoms linked to this long-term condition of the gut are thought to affect around one in five people in the UK at some stage in their lives1.Certain foods, stress, infections, and oversensitivity to pain are all known triggers of IBS symptoms. If you have IBS, you may experience tummy cramps (abdominal pain), bloating, diarrhoea, or constipation on a regular basis.If left unmanaged, these uncomfortable and inconvenient symptoms can interfere with everyday life, including your work life and your personal relationships.While experts are not sure of the exact cause of IBS, they do know that it's a problem with the way your gut (also called your bowel) works. Dr Nirusa Kumaran, GP and lifestyle and functional medicine specialist, explains:"Research has identified three potential reasons for the onset and ongoing symptoms of IBS:"An imbalance in the gut microbiome - sometimes called gut flora, this refers to the microorganisms living in your digestive system.Changes in the gut-brain connection - the two-way connection between the gut and the brain via nerve endings, hormones and chemical signals.Increased intestinal permeability - your intestinal walls allowing harmful substances to enter.Are probiotics good for IBS?This is why methods that improve your gut health are being explored for IBS management. While there is no cure for IBS, probiotics for IBS may help ease and reduce symptom flare-ups.Probiotics for IBS can be explored in addition to any medicines, dietary changes, and lifestyle changes recommended by your doctor.Probiotics for IBS - the 'good' bacteriaProbiotic bacteria are tiny living organisms known as microbes that live in your gut and help to keep it healthy.Having a large enough quantity can assist your digestive system by:Strengthening the intestinal barrier that keeps harmful organisms out.Supporting your immune system.Lessening inflammation in your gut.Reducing occurrences of diarrhoea.You can boost your probiotic levels by:Eating certain fermented foods, or foods where probiotics have been added.Taking probiotic supplements and medicines - in the form of tablets, sachets, or liquids."While they may not work for everyone, several studies have demonstrated the positive influence of probiotics on reducing the symptoms of IBS," says Kumaran. "So it is definitely worth considering probiotics for IBS."A 2020 review of 28 studies involving 3,606 people found that probiotics for IBS could be beneficial for overall symptoms2. In a 2015 review involving 1,793 people, results showed that probiotics could reduce instances of tummy cramps, bloating, and wind3.Not all available probiotic supplements undergo rigorous testing through clinical trials, but there are ways to spot the high-quality products on the market. This is covered in the next section. Our picks for Probiotics for IBS: do they work? Hypnotherapy for IBS: the gut-brain axis Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a gut disorder that causes digestive symptoms like diarrhoea, ...   6min  Hypnotherapy for IBS: the gut-brain axis    6min  The 5 best probiotic foods for a healthy gut   8min  What's the difference between IBS and IBD?   3minWhat is the best probiotic to take for IBS?There is evidence that different strains of probiotics for IBS may be best suited to treat certain types of IBS. The research in this area tends to be quite mixed, and it can be a case of trial and error to find the probiotic that works best for you.Probiotic strains that have been proven to alleviate IBS symptomsThe two main probiotic groups for IBS are Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium:Bifidobacterium - includes strains such as Bifidobacterium bifidum MIMBb75, which has been shown to significantly improve IBS symptoms of tummy cramps, bloating, and diarrhoea4.Lactobacillus - includes strains such as Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM, which has been found to reduce tummy cramps5.Shopping for qualityIf you choose to shop around for probiotic supplements yourself, it's important to select a high-quality product that has been scientifically tested in clinical trials. There are a few things you should consider:The colony-forming units (CFU) count - The National Institutes of Health (NIH) recommend checking if a probiotic supplement label lists the CFU count6. This is the amount of live 'good' bacteria that the probiotic supplement contains. Most probiotics contain at least 1-10 billion CFU per dose.Composition - Check that a product contains a probiotic strain that has been specifically studied for its treatment of IBS. See the main probiotic group names above.Randomised controlled trials. You can contact the probiotic manufacturer for specific information on research they have done in IBS. The most reliable evidence comes from trials that are:Placebo-controlled - the patients are randomly assigned to receive the probiotic or a dummy version.Double-blind - neither the doctor nor the patient knows if they are taking probiotic or placebo.Third-party testing - look for a probiotic supplement that has undergone third-party testing by an independent laboratory. This is a good indication of a high-quality product.How long should probiotics be taken for IBS?If you start a course of probiotics for IBS, don't expect to see results straightaway. One 2019 review found it took an average of eight weeks or more for people with IBS to notice the health benefits7.The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends that people choosing to use probiotics for IBS should take the same brand for at least four weeks at the dose recommended by the manufacturer8.Taking probiotics for IBS over an extended period of time is thought to be safe. There is no evidence that probiotics for IBS can cause any harm in the long term, although more research is needed on the effects of long-term use.IBS and your dietIBS can be different for each person, both in terms of severity and in what can trigger symptoms. If particular foods cause your symptoms to worsen, it's important to look at your diet alongside any probiotic supplements you choose to take.For some, following a healthy diet which includes lots of fruit, vegetables, and plenty of water is enough to make a big difference. Others may need to be more strict with what they eat. If you're unsure if certain foods you eat are aggravating your condition, keep a food symptom diary and note down when symptoms occur after you eat certain foods.Probiotic-rich foodsAs well as various supplement forms, you can also boost your probiotic intake through your diet. Certain fermented foods are naturally rich in probiotics because they are created through the growth of live microbial cultures.Examples include:Live yoghurt.Kombucha (a fermented tea).Kefir (fermented milk).Sauerkraut.Kimchi (Korean pickled cabbage).There are also a range of unfermented foods that have probiotics added to them. NIH cautions that whether these foods can truly count as probiotics depends on6:The number of microorganisms they contain;Whether the strains they contain have health benefits; andWhether they survive digestion.Examples include certain:Cereals and cereal bars.Milks.Juices.Low FODMAPFor up to 70% of people with IBS, eating certain foods can make their symptoms worse9. If this is you, being careful about what you eat and getting to know your food triggers could be key to making life with IBS much easier.Of course, avoiding all your food triggers all of the time is easier said than done. You can also take probiotics to help your gut digest these foods. "It is thought that greater numbers of beneficial probiotic bacteria will help break down the high-FODMAP foods that often trigger IBS," explains Kumaran.FODMAP stands for Fermentable Oligosaccharides, Disaccharides, Monosaccharides, and Polyols. Put simply, these are foods that cause your gut bacteria to produce a lot of gas when they're digested. It's this gas that often causes the typical and uncomfortable IBS symptoms of pain, wind, and bloating.One 2016 study concluded that up to 86% of people with IBS found that following a low- FODMAP diet significantly improved their IBS symptoms10. However, a strict low-FODMAP diet can be very restrictive, so you should have guidance from a dietitian.Further readingFord and Talley: Irritable bowel syndrome.Sun et al: Efficacy and safety of probiotics in irritable bowel syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Didari et al: Effectiveness of probiotics in irritable bowel syndrome: Updated systematic review with meta-analysis.Guglielmetti et al: Randomised clinical trial: Bifidobacterium bifidum MIMBb75 significantly alleviates irritable bowel syndrome and improves quality of life--a double-blind, placebo-controlled study.Lyra et al: Irritable bowel syndrome symptom severity improves equally with probiotic and placebo.National Institutes of Health: Probiotics.Dale et al: Probiotics in irritable bowel syndrome: an up-to-date systematic review.National Institute for Health and Care Excellence: Irritable bowel syndrome in adults: diagnosis and management.Altobelli et al: Low-FODMAP diet improves irritable bowel syndrome symptoms: a meta-analysis.Nanayakkara et al: Efficacy of the low FODMAP diet for treating irritable bowel syndrome: the evidence to date.Read nextHypnotherapy for IBS: the gut-brain axis The 5 best probiotic foods for a healthy gutAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Related InformationPelvic Pain in WomenIrritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)Sterculia granulesMebeverine (Colofac, Aurobeverine)Alverine capsules (Audmonal, Spasmonal)  Hypnotherapy for IBS: the gut-brain axis     6 minutes reading time  26-Jan-24  The 5 best probiotic foods for a healthy gut    8 minutes reading time  24-Oct-23  What's the difference between IBS and IBD?    3 minutes reading time  19-Jul-23  Hello everyone, If you've seen my previous discussion from last year, you will know I was having problems with undigested food, strands of fibre and these yellow balls in my stool. After eliminating...   randomuser333Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Read next Hypnotherapy for IBS: the gut-brain axis  Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Can probiotics improve your IBS symptoms?     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/news-and-features/can-probiotics-improve-your-ibs-symptoms?iitt=bdivRdssO.odx.1Zb.h_tIYd4DxA4kP_4Zl84dxDtI1JbIBL4FhN4IYd4nTTCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


