# Chest Pain: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Signs and Symptoms  Chest Pain Last updated by Dr Rosalyn Adleman, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP  Last updated 26 Sep 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Costochondritis      Bornholm Disease      Pleurisy      Pneumothorax (Trapped Air in the Chest) In this series     Costochondritis      Bornholm Disease      Pleurisy      Pneumothorax (Trapped Air in the Chest) Chest pain refers to pain felt anywhere in the chest area from the level of your shoulders to the bottom of your ribs. It is a common symptom. There are many causes of chest pain. This leaflet only deals with the most common. It can often be difficult to diagnose the exact cause of chest pain without carrying out some tests and investigations.In this article   Is chest pain normal?   Causes of chest pain   Less common causes of chest pain   When to see a doctor for chest pain   Diagnosing chest pain   Chest pain treatment   Preventing chest pain In This Article     Chest PainIn this article Is chest pain normal?  Causes of chest pain  Less common causes of chest pain  When to see a doctor for chest pain  Diagnosing chest pain  Chest pain treatment  Preventing chest pain Is chest pain normal?Most chest pain is not a sign of anything serious. However, it is important to take chest pain seriously because it can sometimes indicate a serious underlying problem. Any new, severe, or persisting chest pain should be discussed with your doctor. This is particularly important if you are an adult and have a history of heart or lung disease.If the chest pain is particularly severe, especially if it is radiating to your arms or jaw, you feel sick, feel sweaty or become breathless, you should call 999/112/911 for an emergency ambulance. These can be symptoms of a heart attack.Causes of chest painDr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGPThere are many possible causes of chest pain. Below is a brief overview of some of the more common causes.AnginaAngina is a pain that comes from the heart. It is usually caused by coronary artery disease (narrowing of the coronary arteries, which supply blood to the heart muscle).In the early stages, blood supply may be adequate when you are resting. However, when you exercise, your heart muscle needs more blood and oxygen, and if the blood cannot get past the narrowed coronary arteries, your heart responds with pain.The chest pain caused by angina may feel like an ache, discomfort or tightness across the front of your chest.Angina pain can also occur with coronary artery spasm or cardiac syndrome X.Heart attackDuring a heart attack (myocardial infarction), a coronary artery or one of its smaller branches is suddenly blocked. This cuts off the blood supply to part of the heart muscle completely.The most common symptom of a heart attack is severe chest pain at rest. Unless the blockage is quickly removed, this part of the heart muscle is at risk of dying. To find out more about the symptoms and treatments for a heart attack, see the separate leaflet called Heart Attack (Myocardial Infarction).Gastro-oesophageal reflux diseaseThis is a general term which describes a range of situations including acid reflux and oesophagitis (inflammation of the lining of the oesophagus, or gullet).Heartburn - usually a burning in the lower chest and upper abdomen - is the main symptom of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. Severe chest pain can develop in some cases and can be mistaken for a heart attack. To find out more about the symptoms and treatments, see the separate leaflet called Acid Reflux and Oesophagitis (Heartburn).CostochondritisThe rib cage is a bony structure that protects the lungs. Softer, more flexible cartilage attaches the ribs to the breastbone (sternum) and the sternum to the collar bones (clavicles) at joints. In costochondritis, there is inflammation in one or more of these joints.Costochondritis causes chest pain, felt at the front of the chest. This is typically a sharp, stabbing chest pain and is worse with movement, exertion and deep breathing.Strained chest wall muscleThere are various muscles that run around and between the ribs to help the rib cage to move during breathing. These muscles can sometimes be strained and can lead to chest pain in that area.If a muscle is strained, there has been stretching or tearing of muscle fibres, often because the muscle has been stretched beyond its limits. For example, a strained chest wall muscle may sometimes develop after heavy lifting, stretching, sudden movement or lengthy (prolonged) coughing. The chest pain is usually worse on movement and on breathing in.AnxietyAnxiety is quite a common cause of chest pain. In some people, the chest pain can be so severe that it is mistaken for angina. Chest pain due to anxiety and panic attacks is known as Da Costa's syndrome.Da Costa's syndrome may be more common in people who have recently had relatives or friends diagnosed with heart problems, or in people who themselves have recently had a heart attack. Investigations show that the coronary arteries are normal with no narrowing. Our picks for Chest Pain What causes pleurisy?Pleurisy means inflammation of the pleura, the lining of the outside of the lungs and the inside...   4min  What causes pleurisy?   4min  What are the symptoms of costochondritis?   4min  What causes costochondritis?   3min  What's causing your chest pain?   4minGeneral blood tests available nowGive yourself a check-up with a general blood profile, now available in Patient Access Book now Less common causes of chest painSome of the less common causes of chest pain include the following:PleurisyPleurisy is due to inflammation of the pleura, a thin membrane with two layers - one which lines the inside of the muscle and ribs of the chest wall, the other which surrounds the lungs. It can cause a 'pleuritic' chest pain. This is a sharp, stabbing chest pain, typically made worse by breathing in or by coughing.Less common but more serious causes of pleuritic pain include pneumonia, or a blood clot in the lung (pulmonary embolism - see below) or a collapsed lung (pneumothorax - see below).Pulmonary embolism (PE)A PE occurs when there is a blockage in one of the arteries (blood vessels)in the lungs - usually due to a blood clot (thrombus) which formed in another part of the circulation. A PE usually causes sharp chest pain felt when breathing in (pleuritic chest pain). Other symptoms include coughing up blood (haemoptysis), breathlessness, mild fever and rapid heart rate.See the separate leaflet called Pulmonary Embolism for more details on this medical emergency.PneumothoraxA pneumothorax is also known as a collapsed lung. It happens when air is trapped between a lung and the chest wall. The air gets there either from the lungs or, following chest wall injury, from outside the body.A pneumothorax typically causes sudden, sharp, stabbing chest pain on one side. The pain is usually made worse by breathing in and you can become breathless. Usually, the larger the pneumothorax, the more breathless you become.PericarditisPericarditis is inflammation of the sac around the heart (the pericardium). This can cause chest pain which may be mistaken for a heart attack. Pericarditis is usually caused by a viral infection which goes away within a few weeks. For more details see the separate leaflet called Pericarditis.Aortic dissectionAortic dissection is a rare condition when the inner layer of the aorta (the biggest blood vessel in the body) tears. Blood then surges through the tear causing the inner and middle layers of the aorta to separate (dissect). It is a medical emergency requiring urgent treatment. The usual symptoms are sudden, severe chest pain and shortness of breath. See the separate leaflet called Aortic Dissection for more information.Peptic ulcerA peptic ulcer is an ulcer on the inside lining of the upper gut caused by stomach acid.A common symptom of a peptic ulcer is pain in the upper tummy (abdomen) just below the breastbone (sternum). Complications of peptic ulcers, which can be serious, include bleeding from the ulcer, and perforation, where the ulcer goes right through (perforates) the wall of the gut.There are separate leaflets called Stomach Ulcer (Gastric Ulcer) and Duodenal Ulcer.Broken rib (rib fracture)A rib fracture can happen after an injury, for example: a fall, road traffic accident or assault. It can also happen due to severe coughing or straining. The usual symptom is a strong pain around the area of the broken rib, particularly when you cough or breathe in. There might be swelling or bruising at the site of the broken rib. There is more information in the separate leaflet Rib Injuries.ShinglesShingles is an infection of a nerve and the area of skin supplied by the nerve. It is caused by the same virus that causes chickenpox. Anyone who has had chickenpox in the past may develop shingles.The usual symptoms are pain and a rash over the strip of skin supplied by one nerve, sometimes on the chest wall. The pain often starts before the rash appears.When to see a doctor for chest painSeek medical help immediately if you have chest pain that is in the middle of your chest, is crushing or squeezing and comes with any of the following symptoms:Pain that spreads to the neck, jaw, or one or both shoulders or arms.Sweating.Shortness of breath.Feeling sick (nausea) or being sick (vomiting).Dizziness or light-headedness.Fast or irregular pulse.You should call 999/112/911 for an emergency ambulance.There are many different causes of chest pain. Some are more serious than others. Any new, severe, or persisting chest pain should be discussed with your doctor. This is particularly important if you are an adult and have a history of heart or lung disease.Diagnosing chest painYour doctor will usually ask you some questions to try to determine the cause of your chest pain. He or she may also examine you. Based on what they find, he or she may advise you to have some investigations, depending on what cause for your chest pain they suspect. Investigations for chest pain can include:An ECG (electrocardiogram or 'heart tracing')There are often typical changes to the normal pattern of the 'heart tracing' (electrocardiogram, or ECG) in a heart attack. Blood testsA blood test that measures a chemical called troponin is the usual test that confirms a heart attack. Damage to heart muscle cells releases troponin into the bloodstream. Another blood test that may be suggested is a D-dimer test. This detects fragments of breakdown products of a blood clot. A positive D-dimer test may raise the suspicion of a deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or a PE.Chest X-rayA chest X-ray can look for pneumonia, collapsed lung (pneumothorax) and other chest conditions.Other scans and imagingMyocardial perfusion scan - often done to confirm the diagnosis of heart chest pain (angina).Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging - also to confirm heart chest pain, this is a type of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan.CT coronary angiogram - a quicker alternative to an MRI scan, in which a CT scan is used to look in detail at your coronary arteries.Coronary angiography - this test uses specialist X-ray equipment and dye injected into the coronary arteries to show the location and severity of any narrowing of the arteries.Isotope scan and CTPA scan look at the circulation in the lung. CTPA stands for 'computerised tomography pulmonary angiogram'. They can show quite accurately whether or not a PE is present.Endoscopy - which uses a thin, flexible telescope passed down your gullet (oesophagus) to examine your stomach lining. This may be recommended if your team thinks your chest pain could be caused by gastro-oesophageal reflux disease or a peptic ulcer.Chest pain treatmentThis will depend on the cause that is found for your chest pain. Follow the links above to the separate leaflets for more information about the treatment for the different causes.If the problem is not an emergency, your doctor may refer you to a consultant for further specialist investigations, as described above.Preventing chest painPreventing chest pain depends on the cause. Your doctor will be able to recommend the best treatment to prevent your chest pain from recurring. Next article  Costochondritis  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Chest pain of recent onset; NICE Clinical Guideline (March 2010, updated Nov 2016)Haasenritter J, Biroga T, Keunecke C, et al; Causes of chest pain in primary care--a systematic review and meta-analysis. Croat Med J. 2015 Oct56(5):422-30.Chest pain; NICE CKS, August 2022 (UK access only)Related InformationWhat's causing your chest pain?CostochondritisPleurisyPneumothorax (Trapped Air in the Chest)Dyspepsia Pro  What causes pleurisy?    4 minutes reading time  19-May-23  What are the symptoms of costochondritis?    4 minutes reading time  18-May-23  What is the treatment for pleurisy?    4 minutes reading time  11-May-23  What are the symptoms of pleurisy?    5 minutes reading time  10-May-23  hi, i was wondeirng if anybody could help or has had anything happen to them similar. for this last week i have been in and out of hospital for 4 days with constant chest pain and shortness of...   ellaxcarssJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Rosalyn Adleman, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Document ID  28396 (v6)  Last updated on   26 September 2023 Next review date  24 September 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Next article Costochondritis Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Chest Pain: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/signs-symptoms/chest-pain-leaflet?iitt=Efs_O.Vp4Fe_h.xjtIbJOfxA4keNOCJNhIHdtfPNx.nJxdb7h._Z4nTTCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


