# Cholecystitis: Symptoms and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Digestive Health    Gallstones and Bile  Cholecystitis Last updated by Dr Doug McKechnie   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 19 Sep 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Gallstones and Bile      Acute Pancreatitis      ERCP In this series     Gallstones and Bile      Acute Pancreatitis      ERCP Cholecystitis is a painful condition caused by an inflamed gallbladder. The most common cause is gallstones.In this article   What is cholecystitis?   Cholecystitis symptoms   What does an ultrasound scan do?   Are there any other tests I might need?   What else could cause cholecystitis symptoms?   Cholecystitis treatment   Do I have to have surgery? In This Article     CholecystitisIn this article What is cholecystitis?  Cholecystitis symptoms  What does an ultrasound scan do?  Are there any other tests I might need?  What else could cause cholecystitis symptoms?  Cholecystitis treatment  Do I have to have surgery? What is cholecystitis?Cholecystitis means inflammation of the gallbladder. Most cases are caused by gallstones. Women are affected more often than men.People with acute cholecystitis are normally admitted to hospital for treatment with painkillers, antibiotics, and fluids given through a drip into a vein.The inflammation may settle down with treatment. Surgery to remove the gallbladder is usually advised to prevent further bouts of cholecystitis. For some people, a procedure to drain bile from the gallbladder is needed, particularly if they can't have surgery.You can find out more about the gallbladder and gallstones in our separate leaflet called Gallstones and Bile.How do gallstones cause cholecystitis?Most people with gallstones do not have any symptoms or problems and do not know they have them. Commonly, the stones simply stay in the gallbladder and cause no harm. However, in some people, gallstones can cause problems. See the separate leaflet called Gallstones and Bile for more details.Gallstones causing cholecystitisCholecystitis is one problem that can occur with gallstones. About 19 in 20 cases of cholecystitis are thought to be caused by gallstones.What seems to happen is that a gallstone becomes stuck in the cystic duct (this is the tube that drains bile out from the gallbladder into the bile duct).Bile then builds up in the gallbladder, which becomes stretched (distended). Because of this, the walls of the gallbladder become inflamed. In some cases the inflamed gallbladder becomes infected. An infected gallbladder is more likely to lead to complications.Cholecystitis symptomsThe symptoms of acute cholecystitis tend to be quite characteristic. They usually come on rather quickly and people with it often feel very unwell. They are:Pain in the upper tummy (abdomen) - the main symptom. It is usually worse on the right side, under the ribs. The pain may travel (radiate) to the back or to the right shoulder and tends to last several hours. The pain tends to be worse on breathing in deeply.Feeling of sick (nausea).Vomiting.A high temperature (fever).When examining the tummy (abdomen) of someone with cholecystitis, healthcare professionals might find something called 'Murphy's sign', meaning an increase in pain when the doctor places their hand under the ribs on the right hand side, and then asks the person to take a deep breath.Want to see a dietician?Book a private assessment with a qualified dietician today. Book now What does an ultrasound scan do?An ultrasound scan is a generally painless test which uses sound waves to scan the tummy (abdomen). It takes around 30 minutes to complete the scan. An ultrasound scan can usually detect gallstones and also whether the wall of the gallbladder is thickened (as occurs with cholecystitis). If the diagnosis is in doubt then other more detailed scans may be done.Are there any other tests I might need?Other tests that might be done in hospital include:Blood tests, to look for signs of infection and inflammation, as well as to check the liver.A computerised tomography (CT) scan of the tummy (abdomen).What else could cause cholecystitis symptoms?The symptoms of cholecystitis are quite characteristic but other conditions can sometimes appear similar. These include appendicitis, a stomach ulcer, and pancreatitis. Pneumonia of the bottom part of the right lung can cause similar symptoms.All of these can make you seriously unwell so it's important to get the diagnosis right. The tests performed in hospital will help to check the diagnosis.Cholecystitis treatmentThe main treatments for cholecystitis are:Pain relief.Intravenous fluids (through a drip).Antibiotics; usually intravenously at first, and later switched to tablets.Surgery to remove the gallbladder. This is called a cholecystectomy.Sometimes, a plastic tube is inserted through the skin to drain infected bile from the gallbladder. This is called a percutaneous cholecystostomy.This is often done when people are too unwell to have surgery.Surgery for cholecystitisFor many people, surgery to remove the gallbladder (cholecystectomy) is recommended, because there is a high risk of cholecystitis occurring again, and it may cause serious problems. Removing the gallbladder stops cholecystitis from happening again.Surgeons used to recommend waiting for 6-8 weeks, or longer, for the inflammation to settle down, before performing a cholecystectomy.We now know that it's usually better to operate much sooner.In the UK, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends that people with cholecystitis are offered an operation to remove the gallbladder within a week of diagnosis. However, not all hospitals offer this. Surgeons might also recommend waiting longer if someone is too sick to have an operation.Different techniques to remove the gallbladder may be used depending on various factors.Keyhole surgery is now the most common way to remove a gallbladder. The medical term for this operation is laparoscopic cholecystectomy. It is called keyhole surgery as only small cuts are needed in the tummy (abdomen) with small scars remaining afterwards. The operation is done with the aid of a special telescope that is pushed into the abdomen through one small cut. This allows the surgeon to see the gallbladder. Instruments pushed through another small cut are used to cut out and remove the gallbladder. Keyhole surgery is not suitable for all people.Some people need a traditional operation to remove the gallbladder. This is called an open cholecystectomy. In this operation a larger cut is needed to get at the gallbladder.A newer approach called natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) is still in the development stage. An operating telescope is inserted into one of the natural openings of the body such as the mouth, anus or vagina to perform the surgery. As yet, there isn't enough evidence to recommend it over other approaches.Do I have to have surgery?Surgery is usually recommended for people with cholecystitis. Treatment with antibiotics, fluids, and pain relief can settle down the inflammation from cholecystitis, but there's a high chance of it coming back without surgery. In one study, about 1 in 3 people who had cholecystitis and didn't have surgery developed further problems from gallstones later on.However, people can choose not to have surgery.For some people, surgeons may also feel that surgery is too risky (for example, if they have serious medical conditions that mean they won't survive an operation).Speak to your clinical team to find out what the options are. They should be able to tell you the risks and benefits of having surgery, as well as the risks and benefits of other options, such as not having an operation, to help you decide what's right for you.What you can expect after surgery, including possible complications, is covered in our separate leaflet called Gallstones and Bile.Previous article   Gallstones and Bile Next article  Acute Pancreatitis  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Gallstone disease; NICE Clinical Guideline (October 2014)Cholecystitis - acute; NICE CKS, July 2021 (UK access only)Gallstone disease; NICE Quality standard, December 2015Gallstones; NICE CKS, June 2019 (UK access only)Related InformationGallstones and Cholecystitis ProGallstones and BileERCP (Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography)Ursodiol (Actigall, Urso)Nausea and Vomiting  Gallstones diet sheet  Could it be gallstones?    4 minutes reading time  22-Feb-23  Summer crunch salad    10min cooking time   Can you get gallstones when you're young?    4 minutes reading time  09-Oct-17  Hello I was wondering if anyone noticed a strange bump above the belly button after the gallbladder removal. When I look at the mirror sideways I see a bump I know I did not have before. I thought it...   carolina68962Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Doug McKechnie Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  4893 (v44)  Last updated on   19 September 2023 Next review date  31 August 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Gallstones and BileNext article Acute Pancreatitis Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Cholecystitis: Symptoms and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/digestive-health/gallstones-and-bile/cholecystitisCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


