# Clindamycin skin preparations for acne - Dalacin T, Zindaclin | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Medicines    Treatments for Skin Conditions  Clindamycin skin preparations for acne Dalacin T, Zindaclin Last updated by Michael Stewart   Peer reviewed by Sid Dajani  Last updated 18 May 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsClindamycin is an antibiotic - to treat acne, it is applied to the skin as a lotion, solution, or gel.Apply the preparation to all of the affected area of skin, not just to individual spots.The most common side-effect is mild skin irritation.In this article   About clindamycin skin preparations   Before using clindamycin skin preparations   How to use clindamycin skin preparations   Getting the most from your treatment   Can clindamycin skin preparations cause problems?   How to store clindamycin skin preparations   Important information about all medicines In This Article     Clindamycin skin preparations for acneDalacin T, ZindaclinIn this article About clindamycin skin preparations  Before using clindamycin skin preparations  How to use clindamycin skin preparations  Getting the most from your treatment  Can clindamycin skin preparations cause problems?  How to store clindamycin skin preparations  Important information about all medicines About clindamycin skin preparationsType of medicineAn antibiotic skin preparationUsed forAcneAlso calledDalacin T®; Zindaclin®; Duac® Once Daily (clindamycin with benzoyl peroxide); Treclin® (clindamycin with tretinoin)Available asSolution, lotion and gelAcne is the common cause of spots. Most people with acne are aged between 12 and 25 years, but some older and younger people are affected too. Small sebaceous glands lie just under your skin surface and make an oil (sebum) that keeps your skin supple and smooth. Tiny pores on your skin allow the sebum to come on to the surface of your skin. In acne, some of these pores become blocked, causing inflamed spots.Antibiotics like clindamycin, work by stopping bacteria that can contribute to acne from multiplying. One brand of clindamycin (Duac® Once Daily gel) also contains benzoyl peroxide, which helps to unplug blocked pores. Clindamycin is also available in combination with tretinoin in a gel called Treclin®.Clindamycin is also available as capsules to take by mouth, and as a cream for vaginal infection. These are used for other conditions, not acne. There are two separate medicine leaflets available which provide more information about these, called Clindamycin capsules for infection and Clindamycin cream for bacterial vaginosis.Before using clindamycin skin preparationsSome medicines are not suitable for people with certain conditions, and sometimes a medicine may only be used if extra care is taken. For these reasons, before you start using clindamycin on your skin, it is important that your doctor knows:If you are pregnant or breastfeeding. (Although using clindamycin lotion is not known to be harmful to an unborn baby, you should let your doctor know if you think you are pregnant.)If you have any bowel problems which cause you to have diarrhoea.If you have ever had an allergic reaction to a medicine or a skin preparation.How to use clindamycin skin preparationsBefore you start the treatment, read the manufacturer's printed information leaflet from inside the pack. The manufacturer's leaflet will give you more information about clindamycin, and it will also explain how to use the preparation you have been prescribed.Apply the preparation exactly as your doctor tells you to. Wash and gently dry your skin, and then apply a thin layer to the whole of the area where your spots occur. The label on the pack will tell you how many times a day to use the preparation. Some clindamycin skin preparations are used once each day, others are used twice a day. Wash your hands well after using it.Dalacin T® topical solution contains a small amount of alcohol which can cause stinging if it gets into grazes, or on to sensitive areas of skin. If you are using this brand of clindamycin, try to avoid getting it on areas of your skin in or around your nostrils, your eyes and your mouth.Getting the most from your treatmentTry to keep any regular appointments with your doctor. This is so your doctor can check on your progress. A full course of treatment may last for several months.It is recommended that you use a mild soap and lukewarm water to wash with, as very hot or cold water may worsen acne. Do not wash more than you normally do. You cannot clean off blackheads.During your treatment your doctor may ask you to use another (non-antibiotic) skin preparation from time to time. It is important that you follow your doctor's advice, as this is to help prevent your spots from becoming resistant to treatment.Can clindamycin skin preparations cause problems?Along with their useful effects, most medicines can cause unwanted side-effects although not everyone experiences them. The table below contains some of the most common ones associated with clindamycin when used on the skin. You will find a full list in the manufacturer's information leaflet supplied with your medicine. The unwanted effects often improve as your body adjusts to the new medicine, but speak with your doctor or pharmacist if any of the following continue or become troublesome.Very common clindamycin side-effects (these affect more than 1 in 10 people)What can I do if I experience this?Skin irritation, itching, dryness or oilinessStop using the preparation for a day or so to allow your skin to recover. These effects usually reduce as your skin gets used to the preparation, but if they continue or become troublesome, you should speak with your doctorLess common clindamycin side-effects (these affect fewer than 1 in 100 people)What can I do if I experience this?DiarrhoeaContact your doctor for further advice before applying any more of the preparationIf you experience any other symptoms which you think may be due to the preparation, speak with your doctor or pharmacist.How to store clindamycin skin preparationsKeep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children.Store in a cool, dry place, away from direct heat and light.Important information about all medicinesThis preparation is for external use only. If someone swallows some of it, go to the accident and emergency department of your local hospital. Take the container with you, even if it is empty.If you buy any medicines, check with a pharmacist that they are safe to take with your other medicines.If you are having an operation or dental treatment, tell the person carrying out the treatment which medicines you are taking or using.This preparation is for you. Never give it to other people, even if their condition appears to be the same as yours.Do not keep out-of-date or unwanted medicines. Take them to your local pharmacy which will dispose of them for you.If you have any questions about this preparation, ask your pharmacist for further advice.Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Manufacturer's PIL, Dalacin® T Topical Solution/Topical Lotion; Pfizer Limited, The electronic Medicines Compendium. Dated February 2021.Medicines Complete BNF 86th Edition; British Medical Association and Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London.Related InformationClindamycin cream for bacterial vaginosis (Dalacin)Co-cyprindiol tablets (Clairette, Dianette, Teragezza)Erythromycin (Erythrocin, Erythroped)Erythromycin (with zinc) skin solution for acne (Zineryt)Septic Arthritis (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)  I have woken up this morning with a red spot on my upper arm which is very painful can someone advise please what mind of spot this is   lorna70264Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Michael Stewart Peer reviewed by  Sid Dajani Document ID  3433 (v28)  Last updated on   18 May 2023 Next review date  17 May 2026 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Clindamycin skin preparations for acne - Dalacin T, Zindaclin      close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/medicine/clindamycin-skin-preparations-for-acne-dalacin-t-zindaclinCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


