# Cold Sores (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment) | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Children's Health    Viral Skin Infections  Cold Sores Last updated by Dr Toni Hazell   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 19 May 2022   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Viral Skin Infections      Primary Cold Sore Infection (Symptoms and Treatment)      Pityriasis Rosea      Molluscum Contagiosum In this series     Viral Skin Infections      Primary Cold Sore Infection (Symptoms and Treatment)      Pityriasis Rosea      Molluscum Contagiosum About 1 in 5 people in the UK have recurring cold sores. Cold sores usually resolve on their own without treatment in 7-10 days. Antiviral creams may help to reduce the severity of cold sore symptoms, and they are most effective the earlier they are used when a cold sore is starting to develop.In this article   What causes cold sores?   What triggers cold sores?   What are the symptoms of a cold sore?   Are cold sores contagious?   Do I need any tests for cold sores?   Self-care advice for cold sores   How to treat cold sores   Do I need to contact my GP? In This Article     Cold SoresIn this article What causes cold sores?  What triggers cold sores?  What are the symptoms of a cold sore?  Are cold sores contagious?  Do I need any tests for cold sores?  Self-care advice for cold sores  How to treat cold sores  Do I need to contact my GP? Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGPWhat causes cold sores?Cold sores are caused by the herpes simplex virus (HSV). Most cold sores are caused by the type 1 strain (HSV-1). The type 2 HSV strain (HSV-2) usually causes genital herpes but very occasionally can cause cold sores around the mouth. See the separate leaflet called Genital Herpes for more details.A first cold sore often occurs in childhood. The virus infects through the moist inner skin that lines the mouth. It is commonly passed on by skin contact such as kisses from a family member who has a cold sore. The first infection does not always cause symptoms. See the separate leaflet called Primary Cold Sore Infection for more details.After the first infection, the virus settles in a nearby nerve sheath and remains there for the rest of your life. For most of the time, the virus lies dormant (inactive) and causes no symptoms. However, in some people the virus becomes active from time to time. When activated, the virus multiplies and travels down the nerve sheath to cause cold sore blisters around the mouth. Some people have cold sores often, others only now and then. It is not clear what causes the dormant virus to become active.What triggers cold sores?Some things that may trigger the herpes simplex virus to activate and cause a cold sore include:Illness. Cold sores may occur during feverish illnesses such as colds, coughs and flu.Menstruation. Cold sores are common around the time of monthly periods.Stress  or just being 'run down' for one of many reasons.Sunshine. Strong, direct sunlight may trigger cold sores in some people.What are the symptoms of a cold sore?Herpes simplex cold sore on the lipBen Tillman (Own work), Public domain, via Wikimedia CommonsBy Ben Tillman (Own work), Public domain, via Wikimedia CommonsYou may feel a tingle or an itch before the blisters appear, usually around your lips or nose. This can last several hours, or up to a day or so. After the tingle, one or more blisters appear which are usually sore. The blisters contain fluid that is teeming with the herpes virus. The blisters may weep and take several days to form scabs. Cold sores can be very tender and painful.Until the cold sores have 'scabbed over' and are completely dry, the cold sore is very infectious and can be spread to other people. The scab slowly disappears over a week or so, leaving no scar. Some virus will remain dormant (inactive) in the nerve sheath, ready to cause another cold sore sometime in the future.Are cold sores contagious?Yes. When you have a cold sore you should not kiss anyone or allow anyone to come into skin contact with the sore. In particular, avoid kissing newborn babies and anyone who has a weakened immune system (an immunocompromised person). Immunocompromised people include people having chemotherapy for cancer and people with conditions such as HIV. Avoid oral sex until the cold sores have completely healed. When you have no symptoms - when the virus is dormant (inactive) - you are less infectious. Healthy people who already have cold sores cannot be re-infected.Do I need any tests for cold sores?Tests are not usually needed to confirm the diagnosis of cold sores. Cold sore symptoms of tingling pain followed by the typical blisters that crust around the nose and mouth are usually enough to make the diagnosis and treat cold sores.Taking a sample of the blister fluid on a special viral swab can help confirm the diagnosis of HSV. A blood test can also detect the virus more reliably than a swab can. Neither of these tests is routinely available at your GP surgery. Testing might be done in people who have a poor immune system (immunocompromised people). Blood tests may be available for people with severe infections if there is a need for them during a hospital admission.Self-care advice for cold soresTry not to touch or pick cold sores. Only touch cold sores when applying topical creams.Creams, gels and other topical treatments should be dabbed on the cold sores rather than rubbed in. This is to minimise damage to the blisters which may spread the virus around, or cause more pain by breaking the blisters or scabs.Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water after touching cold sores and after applying creams to them.If you find that sunlight triggers your cold sores, try using sunscreen lip balm (SPF 15 or more) before going out into bright sunlight. This has been found to prevent some bouts of cold sores in some people. Do not share items like lip balms with other people if you have cold sores. Pots of sunscreen lip balm may be less convenient than lipsticks but minimise the risk of contamination of the product, if applied with a clean finger.Pain can be eased by painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen.A pharmacist can advise a soothing cream or gel. Again, it is important not to share these treatments.There is a risk of infecting the eyes with the cold sore virus if your contact lenses become contaminated. You can prevent this with careful handwashing before handling your contact lenses. If you have disposable lenses and you suspect you have contaminated them, it is probably best to throw them away. If you have any concerns, it may be better to wear your glasses and seek advice from your GP or optician (optometrist).How to treat cold soresYou can buy many cold sore treatments from a pharmacy. These include:Painkilling gelsCholine salicylate gel is available for pain control but cannot be used under the age of 16 due to the risk of Reye's syndrome.Lidocaine is a local anaesthetic gel that can also be used to control pain.Antiviral creamAciclovir (Zovirax®) can be bought over-the-counter (OTC) at pharmacies. This does not kill the virus but prevents the virus from multiplying. It has little effect on existing blisters but may prevent cold sores from becoming worse. The cream may provide some protection against cold sores caused by sunlight if it is used before exposure. If you use an antiviral cream as soon as symptoms start then the cold sore may not last as long as usual and may be less severe. There is debate as to how well the cream works. Aciclovir has to be applied five times per day for five days.Antiviral tabletsAciclovir is also available in tablet form. There are other oral antiviral medications too, such as valaciclovir. Oral antiviral tablets are not routinely used for the treatment of cold sores. Oral antiviral tablets may be prescribed in severe cold sore infections, in newborn babies, or in people who have a poor immune system (immunocompromised people). They do have some effect in preventing further attacks and are prescribed for people who have severe attacks or who have problems with their immune system. Oral antivirals are used with the aim of stopping the virus multiplying and preventing the cold sores from becoming too severe. Severe viral infections such as a severe herpes infection can be extremely dangerous to the health of immunocompromised people.Laser treatmentSome people have found that treatment with a type of laser beam called narrow-band light has worked well. This type of treatment is sometimes called photodynamic therapy. A machine which delivers narrow-band light can be bought from pharmacies. A number of brands are available.Do I need to contact my GP?Usually you would not need to see your GP if you have cold sores. With recurrent bouts of cold sores you will probably come to recognise the symptoms. You should contact your GP if you are unsure of the diagnosis, or if the cold sores are not resolving after a week or so. If you have a poor immune system (you are an immunocompromised person) and develop possible cold sores, you should contact your GP. You may need tests to confirm the virus, and/or oral antiviral medicines.Previous article   Viral Skin Infections Next article  Primary Cold Sore Infection (Symptoms and Treatment)  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  de Paula Eduardo C, Aranha AC, Simoes A, et al; Laser treatment of recurrent herpes labialis: a literature review. Lasers Med Sci. 2013 Apr 13.Harmenberg J, Oberg B, Spruance S; Prevention of ulcerative lesions by episodic treatment of recurrent herpes labialis: A literature review. Acta Derm Venereol. 2010 Mar90(2):122-30.Herpes simplex - oral; NICE CKS, October 2021 (UK access only)Related InformationOral Herpes Simplex (HSV-1) ProPrimary Cold Sore Infection (Symptoms and Treatment)Valaciclovir for viral infections (Valtrex)Aciclovir for viral infections (Zovirax)Genital Herpes Simplex (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment) Pro Sponsored  Can cold weather trigger cold sores?    6 minutes reading time  05-Dec-19 Sponsored  What to do when you feel a cold sore coming on    4 minutes reading time  21-Nov-19  Surprising facts everyone should know about cold sores     6 minutes reading time  01-May-18  I was diagnosed with hepers simplex virus 1 but my outbreaks are on my opening of the vaginal area. My breakouts consist of alot of tears i talked to my obgyn and i asked her am i going to get these...   angela51933Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Toni Hazell Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  4221 (v42)  Last updated on   19 May 2022 Next review date  18 May 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Viral Skin InfectionsNext article Primary Cold Sore Infection (Symptoms and Treatment) Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Cold Sores (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/childrens-health/viral-skin-infections-leaflet/cold-soresCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


