# Common Cold: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Chest and Lungs    Cough  Common Cold Last updated by Dr Pippa Vincent   Peer reviewed by Dr Surangi Mendis  Last updated 9 Jan 2024   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Cough      Viral Cough (Cough Caused by a Virus)      Coughs and Colds in Children      Chronic Persistent Cough in Adults      Coughing up Blood (Haemoptysis)      Cough Medicines In this series     Cough      Viral Cough (Cough Caused by a Virus)      Coughs and Colds in Children      Chronic Persistent Cough in Adults      Coughing up Blood (Haemoptysis)      Cough Medicines The common cold is caused by an infection with a virus (a viral infection). It usually gets better in a week or two. This leaflet gives some tips on how to try to manage the symptoms and which symptoms might indicate a more serious illness.In this article   What is the common cold?   Common cold symptoms   How long does the common cold last?   Common cold treatments   Supplements and home remedies for the common cold   Can a cold turn into pneumonia?   Can the common cold be prevented? In This Article     Common ColdIn this article What is the common cold?  Common cold symptoms  How long does the common cold last?  Common cold treatments  Supplements and home remedies for the common cold  Can a cold turn into pneumonia?  Can the common cold be prevented? What is the common cold?What is a cold?Dr Roger Henderson, MBBSA common cold is an infection of the nose and upper airways (upper respiratory tract infection) caused by a virus. As the name suggests, a common cold is extremely common. An adult can expect to get 2-4 colds a year and an older child can expect to get about 5-6 colds a year. Infants and young children (of nursery and school reception age) may get as many as 12 colds a year - it may feel as though they have cold more often than they don't.Many different viruses cause the common cold. This is why people get colds multiple times and why immunisation against the common cold is not possible.Respiratory tractThe diagram above shows the sites of a range of respiratory infections. This leaflet just deals with the common cold (an upper respiratory tract infection). Our picks for Common Cold Do any natural cold remedies work?This winter many of us find ourselves fighting off well-known cold symptoms, including a sore th...   6min  Do any natural cold remedies work?   6min  What to eat when you have a cold   5min  What is weather change sickness?    8min  The respiratory systemCommon cold symptomsThe main symptoms of a common cold are:A blocked (congested) nose.A runny nose.Coughing.Sneezing.Feeling generally unwell.Feeling tired.A high temperature (fever).Headache.Body aches and pains.At first there is a clear discharge (mucus) from the nose. This often becomes thick and yellow/green after 2-3 days. It may be difficult to sleep due to a blocked nose.The cough often is associated with phlegm which can be clear or coloured - green phlegm (sputum) does not indicate a bacterial lower respiratory tract infection and is commonly associated with the common cold.How long does the common cold last?Cold symptoms are typically at their worst after 2-3 days and then gradually clear. However, the cough may carry on for up to 3 weeks after the infection has gone. This is because swelling (inflammation) in the airways, caused by the infection, can take a while to settle.How long is the cold contagious?Most people with the common cold will be infectious for around two weeks. However, symptoms are usually worse during the first 2-3 days, which is when they're most likely to spread the cold.Are you eligible for a free NHS flu vaccination?You may be entitled to a free NHS flu vaccination from your GP or local pharmacist. Find out if you are eligible today. Find out more Common cold treatmentsA main aim of treatment for the common cold) is to ease symptoms whilst the immune system clears the infection.No medications get rid of the common cold or shorten the course of the illness. The immune system will fight it off in its own time. One or more of the following may be helpful:Taking paracetamol or ibuprofenParacetamol and ibuprofen will reduce a high temperature (fever) and ease aches, pains and headaches. It is important to follow the instructions given with the medicine carefully and not to take more than the advised dose.Children under the age of 5 years only need these medications if they have a fever or appear distressed by their symptoms.Having plenty to drinkA mild lack of fluid in the body (dehydration) can result from a fever and therefore drinking more fluid is advised. If there is no fever, there is no evidence that drinking more fluid than usual makes a difference.Smokers should try to stop for good. Common colds (and more serious lung diseases) tend to last longer in smokers.Steam inhalationThere is not very much evidence that this helps but some people report finding it useful. It is very important to be careful to avoid burns and scalds, particularly with children. The safest way to inhale steam is to sit in the bathroom with the door closed whilst running a hot shower to make the room steamy.Vapour rubsVapour rubs can be bought in pharmacies and supermarkets. Some people find they help with a blocked nose. The vapour can be rubbed on to the chest and/or back of the person with the cold but the area under the nose should be avoided.Sore throat lozengesSucking sore throat lozenges (available from pharmacies and supermarkets) or boiled sweets may help to ease a sore throat.Warm drinks with honey and lemonThis may help to ease a sore throat. (It is advised not to give honey to babies less than 1 year old as it is not known if this is safe.) Similarly, gargling salt water may temporarily ease symptoms of a sore throat.Salt (saline) nose dropsThese are nose drops made of a salty solution which may help clear a blocked nose. They are sometimes helpful for babies who are having difficulty breathing through a blocked nose as they feed. They can be bought from a pharmacy.What about cold and flu remedies?Many other cold and cough remedies at pharmacies can be bought which are only suitable for adults and older children. See the additional information below about giving these remedies to children, and also the separate leaflet Coughs and Colds in Children.These remedies do not help fight the infection but they may be useful for certain symptoms. For example, a decongestant nasal spray may help to clear a blocked nose.It is important to remember that cold and cough remedies often contain several ingredients and therefore it is vital to be careful about taking more than one remedy due to the risk of taking too much of one ingredient. For example, some cold remedies contain paracetamol and a decongestant, so if taking that and paracetamol as well, too much paracetamol could be ingested which could be dangerous.Some cold and cough remedies cause drowsiness. This may be welcome at bedtime if there is difficulty sleeping due to the cold but it is important not to drive if feeling drowsy.Using nasal spraysA decongestant spray can be used to ease nasal congestion but must not be used for more than a few days. It can have an immediate effect to clear a blocked nose although the effect does not last very long. If a decongestant nasal spray is used for more than 7 days, it may cause the nose to become more blocked again. This is called a rebound effect.Use of over-the-counter cough and cold medicines in childrenIn March 2009 an important statement was issued by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) which says:"The new advice is that parents and carers should no longer use over-the-counter (OTC) cough and cold medicines in children under 6. There is no evidence that they work and they can cause side-effects, such as allergic reactions, effects on sleep or hallucinations."For 6 to 12 year olds these medicines will continue to be available but will only be sold in pharmacies, with clearer advice on the packaging and from the pharmacist. This is because the risk of side-effects is reduced in older children because they weigh more, get fewer colds and can say if the medicine is doing any good. More research is being done by industry on how well these medicines work in children aged 6-12 years."Note: paracetamol and ibuprofen are not classed as cough and cold medicines and can still be given to children.What about antibiotic medicines?Antibiotics are not advised for the common cold as antibiotics do not kill viruses. The immune system can clear the infection. Even if there is bacterial involvement, antibiotics do little to speed up recovery from the common cold.Antibiotics may make symptoms worse, as many people develop side-effects such as diarrhoea, feeling sick or a rash. Antibiotics may be prescribed if there is an underlying (chronic) lung disease such as COPD. They may also be prescribed if a complication develops, such as pneumonia - but this is unlikely to occur if you are otherwise healthy. They do not prevent complications from developing.Supplements and home remedies for the common coldMany research studies have been done to try to find something which cures or prevents the common cold. So far there has been no success. Currently there is no  good evidence to suggest that any of the following remedies should be used:Garlic.Vitamin C.Echinacea.Chinese herbal remedies.There is some limited evidence that zinc supplementation may reduce the duration of a cold by two days.Can a cold turn into pneumonia?Most common colds do not cause complications. A common cold may trigger coughing, wheezing and shortness of breath in people with asthma, although people with asthma are no more likely to develop bacterial lower respiratory tract infections, or other lung diseases.Sometimes the infection travels to the lung tissue, sinuses, or ears. Bacteria may thrive in the mucus so a few people with colds may go on to develop a bacterial infection of the lung tissue (pneumonia), ears or sinuses.Medical advice should be sought if symptoms do not start to ease within two weeks or if there is a suspicion that a complication is developing. In particular, symptoms to look out for that may mean more than just a URTI include:Headaches becoming worse or severe.Fast breathing, shortness of breath, wheezing or chest pains.Coughing up blood or if the phlegm (sputum) becomes rusty-coloured.Becoming drowsy or confused.A cough persisting for longer than 3-4 weeks.Can the common cold be prevented?Prevention of the common cold is difficult. Many different viruses can cause an upper respiratory tract infection.However, the following are suggestions that may reduce the risk of catching a cold or of passing one on. People with a common cold should:Try to avoid close contact with others - for example, kissing, hugging, etc.Wash their hands often with soap and water. Many viruses are passed on by touch, especially from hands that are contaminated with a virus.Avoid sharing towels, flannels, etc.Children should be discouraged from sharing toys belonging to a child with a URTI. If a child has a URTI, toys should be washed with soapy water after use.Basically, common sense and good hygiene may prevent the passing on of some viruses that cause URTIs.Exercise may help prevent the common cold tooAn interesting research study (see references, below) showed that people who exercise regularly are less likely to get the common cold.The study reviewed 1,002 people over 12 weeks during the winter. It found that the people who exercised on five or more days a week had a much lower chance of developing a common cold compared with those who did little exercise.Previous article   Cough Next article  Viral Cough (Cough Caused by a Virus)  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Common cold; NICE CKS, February 2022 (UK access only)Over-the-counter cough and cold medicines for children; Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), 2014Karsch-Volk M, Barrett B, Kiefer D, et al; Echinacea for preventing and treating the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Feb 202:CD000530. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000530.pub3.Hemila H, Chalker E; Vitamin C for preventing and treating the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Jan 311:CD000980. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000980.pub4.Wu T, Zhang J, Qiu Y, et al; Chinese medicinal herbs for the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Jan 24(1):CD004782.DeGeorge KC, Ring DJ, Dalrymple SN; Treatment of the Common Cold. Am Fam Physician. 2019 Sep 1100(5):281-289.Lissiman E, Bhasale AL, Cohen M; Garlic for the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Nov 11(11):CD006206. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006206.pub4.Wang MX, Win SS, Pang J; Zinc Supplementation Reduces Common Cold Duration among Healthy Adults: A Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials with Micronutrients Supplementation. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2020 Jul103(1):86-99. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.19-0718. Epub 2020 Apr 23.Nieman DC, Henson DA, Austin MD, et al; Upper respiratory tract infection is reduced in physically fit and active adults. Br J Sports Med. 2010 Nov 1.Rao G, Rowland K; PURLs: Zinc for the common cold--not if, but when. J Fam Pract. 2011 Nov60(11):669-71.Related InformationThe respiratory systemCommon Cold (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment) ProViral Cough (Cough Caused by a Virus)Acute BronchitisPain Relief in Children Pro  Do any natural cold remedies work?    6 minutes reading time  09-Feb-24  What to eat when you have a cold    5 minutes reading time  22-Dec-23  Coughs, colds and sore throats: is honey better than over-the-counter treatments?    4 minutes reading time  05-Nov-20  How to ask kids about their health    4 minutes reading time  18-Dec-20  hi, I would like some advice regarding exercises that could help improve lung healththank youCharles   charles99475Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Pippa Vincent Peer reviewed by  Dr Surangi Mendis Document ID  4459 (v44)  Last updated on   09 January 2024 Next review date  07 January 2029 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  CoughNext article Viral Cough (Cough Caused by a Virus) Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Common Cold: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/chest-lungs/cough-leaflet/common-cold-upper-respiratory-tract-infectionsCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


