# Contraceptive Injection: Information and Side-Effects | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Sexual Health    Long-acting Reversible Contraceptives (LARCs)  Contraceptive Injection Last updated by Dr Caroline Wiggins, MRCGP    Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP   Last updated 27 Apr 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Long-acting Reversible Contraceptives (LARCs)      Contraceptive Implant      Intrauterine Contraceptive Device      Levonorgestrel Intrauterine Device (LNG-IUD) In this series     Long-acting Reversible Contraceptives (LARCs)      Contraceptive Implant      Intrauterine Contraceptive Device      Levonorgestrel Intrauterine Device (LNG-IUD) The contraceptive injection contains a progestogen hormone. It is used to prevent pregnancy.In this article   What is the contraceptive injection?   How does the contraceptive injection work?   How effective is the contraception injection?   Advantages of the contraceptive injection   Disadvantages of the contraceptive injection   Contraceptive injection side-effects   Who cannot have the contraceptive injection?   How is the contraceptive injection given?   Where can you get the contraceptive injection? In This Article     Contraceptive InjectionIn this article What is the contraceptive injection?  How does the contraceptive injection work?  How effective is the contraception injection?  Advantages of the contraceptive injection  Disadvantages of the contraceptive injection  Contraceptive injection side-effects  Who cannot have the contraceptive injection?  How is the contraceptive injection given?  Where can you get the contraceptive injection? What is the contraceptive injection?The contraceptive injection is an effective form of contraception that is given to prevent pregnancy. It contains a progestogen hormone called depo medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA). Progestogen hormones are very similar to a woman's own hormone called progesterone.Depo-Provera® is the brand used most often and it is given every 12 weeks. Sayana Press® is very similar to Depo-Provera®and also contains DMPA. Noristerat® is a brand which is rarely used as it is limited to very short-term use. The rest of this leaflet is about the injections that contain DMPA.The contraceptive injection is sometimes called a LARC. This stands for long-acting reversible contraceptive. You can read about the other LARCs that contain progestogen in our separate leaflets called Contraceptive Implant and Intrauterine System (IUS). There is also a separate leaflet on the LARC which doesn't contain any hormone, called the Intrauterine Contraceptive Device (The Coil).How does the contraceptive injection work?The injection works by injecting progestogen into a muscle or under the skin.. It works in three ways:Stopping the release of the egg from the ovary (ovulation).Thickening the mucus at the neck of the womb (cervix) which forms a mucous plug. This stops sperm getting through to the womb (uterus) to fertilise an egg.Thinning the lining of the womb.. This makes it unlikely that any egg that has managed to be fertilised will be able to implant in the womb and develop.How effective is the contraceptive injection?Dr Rosemary Leonard MBE, MRCGPHow effective is the contraception injection?It is 99.8% effective at preventing pregnancy if used correctly. Research shows that in a real world setting, rather than in research settings, it is 94% effective at preventing pregnancy.Get tested todaySexual health blood and urine profiles now available in Patient Access Book now Advantages of the contraceptive injectionYou do not have to remember to take a pill every day. You only have to think about contraception every 2-3 months.It does not interfere with sex.It can be used when breastfeeding.Periods often stop completely, which is perfectly safe.It may help some of the problems people get with periods, such as premenstrual tension, heavy, painful periods and endometriosis.It can be used by many of the women who cannot take the combined pill.It is not harmful to women with sickle cell disease and may even reduce the pain of a sickle crisis.It may be taken by women who are on medication that would interfere with other forms of hormonal contraception - for example, medications for epilepsy or HIV.It may reduce the chances of getting cancer of the ovary or cancer of the womb (endometrial cancer)If you want to stop using it you don't have to go back to your doctor or nurse to have it removed; you just have to wait for it to wear off.Disadvantages of the contraceptive injectionThe injection cannot be removed once given. Any side-effects may last for more than 2-3 months, until the injection wears off.It may take some time after the last injection for you to become fertile again. This time varies from woman to woman. It can take up to a year before fertility returns. This delay is not related to the length of time you use this method of contraception.There is a possible link between the injection use and cervical cancer. It is not known if this is because of the injection or other factors. It is important to be up to date with cervical smear tests.It does not protect against sexually transmitted diseases.Your periods are likely to change. During the first few months, some women have irregular bleeding which can be heavier and longer than normal. However, it is unusual for heavy periods to persist. After the first few months it is more common for the periods to become lighter than usual, although they may be irregular. Many women have no periods at all, which many see as a benefit. The longer it is used, the more likely it is that periods will stop. After one year of using the injection periods stop for about 7 in 10 women.Some women find that having unpredictable or irregular periods can be a nuisance. If you develop irregular bleeding while receiving the injection then you should inform your doctor or nurse. You may be able to have your next injection early or be given other treatment to stop the bleeding. Irregular bleeding can sometimes be due to another reason, such as an infection. This may need to be treated.Contraceptive injection side-effectsApart from changes to periods (menstrual cycle), side-effects are uncommon. If one or more should occur, they often settle down over a couple of months or so. One possible side-effect is weight gain. This seems to be a particular problem for young women (under 18 years) who are already overweight when they start the injection.Some women also report fluid retention, worsening acne, headaches and breast discomfort. However, there is little evidence that the injection causes these symptoms.The most common reason for women to stop having the injections is because of irregular bleeding.The injection can lead to some 'thinning' of the bones. This does not usually cause any problems and the bones go back to normal when the injections are stopped. Using injectable contraception for many years might lead to more bone thinning. It is therefore recommended that you have a review every two years with your doctor or nurse. They will discuss if this method is still the best choice for you.Very occasionally, the injection can cause some pain or swelling at the site of the injection. You should see your doctor or nurse if you have any signs of infection at the site of injection (for example, redness or swelling).Who cannot have the contraceptive injection?Most women can have the contraceptive injection. Your doctor or family planning nurse will discuss any current and past illnesses. For example, you should not have it if you have had breast cancer, liver disease, or cardiovascular disease such as angina or a stroke.If you have risk factors for 'thinning' of the bones (osteoporosis) then it is normally advisable to use another method of contraception. Examples of risk factors include:Not having a period for six months or more (as a result of over-exercising, dieting or an eating disorder).Drinking a lot of alcohol.Smoking.Being underweight.A close family history of osteoporosis.How is the contraceptive injection given?The injection is given into a muscle, usually in the buttock, or into the thigh or tummy (abdomen). It should not be given during pregnancy. It is important to be sure you are not pregnant when you have your first injection. However, if you were already pregnant without knowing, there is no evidence that it does the baby or the pregnancy any harm.The first injection is usually given during the first 1-5 days of a period. If you have the injection within five days of starting a period, you will be protected immediately.Further injections are then given up to 13 weeks apart.If you miss your appointment, you can have the injection at any time, as long as you are certain you are not pregnant. Your practice nurse or doctor will advise you to use extra contraception (such as a condom) for seven days after the injection.If you are late for your injection but have had sex and can't be certain that you aren't pregnant, you may still be able to have your injection. You will then need to do a pregnancy test three weeks later. This is what is called an 'off-label use' and not all practices will allow it.Sayana Press® has been designed so that you can give it to yourself. This may be useful if you have trouble getting to your surgery or clinic. Your doctor or nurse can advise you about this.The doctor or nurse will tell you which type of injection you have and how long it is until the next injection. It can be given up to two weeks early. This may be convenient if, for example, you are due to be on a holiday when your next injection is due.Where can you get the contraceptive injection?In the UK, you can obtain the contraceptive injection at the following places:General Practices. This may be with a GP or with a practice nurse.Sexual Health Clinics.Brook Advisory Centres.Note: don't forget, you will lose protection against pregnancy if you are late in having the next injection.Previous article   Contraceptive Implant Next article  Intrauterine Contraceptive Device  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Progestogen-only Injectable Contraception Clinical Guidance; Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare (December 2014, amended 2020)Long-acting reversible contraception; NICE Clinical Guideline (October 2005 - updated July 2019)Contraception - Progestogen-only methods; NICE CKS, September 2022 (UK access only)UK Medical Eligibility Criteria Summary Table for intrauterine and hormonal contraception; Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare, 2016 - amended September 2019Lopez LM, Ramesh S, Chen M, et al; Progestin-only contraceptives: effects on weight. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Aug 28(8):CD008815. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008815.pub4.Find a sexual health clinic near you; NHS servicesRelated InformationProgestogen-only Injectable Contraceptives ProMedroxyprogesterone injection for contraception (Depo-Provera, SAYANA PRESS)Norethisterone contraceptive injection (Noristerat)Heavy Periods (Menorrhagia)Endometriosis  How has the COVID-19 pandemic affected access to contraception?    7 minutes reading time  29-Oct-21  Should you change your contraception to the coil or implant?    6 minutes reading time  20-Nov-18  so I've been on the depo shot for 6 years now. I've done a-lot of research about it where your not supposed to be on it for more then 2 years as it causes bones to weaken. i had a knee operation...   Coco123451Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Caroline Wiggins, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP Document ID  4283 (v45)  Last updated on   27 April 2023 Next review date  17 March 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Contraceptive ImplantNext article Intrauterine Contraceptive Device Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Contraceptive Injection: Information and Side-Effects     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/sexual-health/long-acting-reversible-contraceptives-larc/contraceptive-injectionCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


