# Coronavirus: what are moderate, severe and critical COVID-19? | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    SARS and MERS Virus    Features  Added to  Saved itemsCoronavirus: what are moderate, severe and critical COVID-19?        Save       Remove from Saved       Print      Share      FeedbackWhilst the majority of people experience a mild or asymptomatic coronavirus infection, some people will have far more serious and even life-threatening symptoms and complications. Last updated by Dr Mary Lowth   Peer reviewed by Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE  Last updated 1 Apr 2020 7 mins readUse Patient's coronavirus checker tool if you have any symptoms of fever or a new cough. Until you have used the tool and been advised what action to take, please stay at home and avoid contact with other people.Cases of coronavirus and COVID-19 can generally be categorised into five groups:AsymptomaticMildModerateSevereCriticalIn the first of this series of two articles we looked at asymptomatic and mild infections. In this feature we will explain moderate, severe or critical coronavirus and COVID-19.Moderate COVID-19If your illness gets a worse than the mild categorisation then you may move towards being a moderate case, with inflammation lower down in the lungs, so lung symptoms like cough are more marked.The lungs consist of large airways (bronchi), smaller airways (bronchioles) and the tiny air sacs on the end (alveoli) where oxygen is extracted from the air. They contain a fluid called surfactant which keeps the lungs stretchy and compliant and helps keep the air sacs open. Patients with moderate COVID-19 may have inflammation moving down into the bronchioles. They are more breathless and tend to have an increased heart rate, particularly if they are moving around.With moderate COVID-19:You may have a more troublesome cough than those with mild symptoms.Your temperature is more likely to reach or exceed 37.8°C.You may be breathless on exercise, even on walking up the stairs, but not to a degree that alarms you, and if you potter around your house or sit still you are not breathless.It may be a little sore to keep coughing but you are not in pain.The cough may be, for a few days, very persistent, coughing many times an hour.Your sleep may be slightly disturbed by your cough, but you do get some sleep, and you are not breathless in bed.You may get diarrhoea. Nausea and vomiting are, however, unlikely.You may have a headache, particularly if you are hot.You may show early signs of inflammation of your lungs - you are more breathless than a mild case, where breathlessness is only slight and on exercise.You may feel tired, but still able to move about your own home comfortably, and you can shower and self-care if you must, even though you may not want to.You may feel dry-mouthed, from breathing through an open mouth. But when you pass urine it is still pale yellow, the colour of a glass of lager, so you are not dehydrated.You can sit and watch TV or read a book without feeling you are struggling to breathe, or worrying that you can't breathe.If you talk to others, nobody thinks you are confused or not making sense.You may be able to prepare your food and drink, or you may feel too weary to do so, but you are still able to eat, even if it is less than usual. Your ability to eat is not prevented by the need to breathe.For a few days you may feel so tired that you want to stay in bed.You may feel miserable, weepy or low.Moderate COVID-19 is very common. It seems to last about 7-14 days.Seek medical advice by phone immediately if:You have these symptoms but you are becoming increasingly breathless.You cannot manage basic things like showering and eating.You cannot speak in whole sentences without taking extra breaths.You should call NHS 111 (or the relevant number for your region) to speak with a nurse.If you are too breathless to talk to someone on the phone, or your breathing is becoming rapidly harder and faster at rest, call 999 or get someone to do it for you. Our picks for Coronavirus: what are moderate, severe and critical COVID-19? Is it COVID-19 or flu this winter?Cases of flu and COVID-19 are both on the rise this winter, so how can you tell the difference b...   7min  Is it COVID-19 or flu this winter?   7min  Will we need a COVID-19 booster vaccine every year?   4min  Why it's a good thing if you feel unwell after your COVID-19 booster jab   3min  What are the school COVID rules October 2023?    3minAre you eligible for a free NHS flu vaccination?You may be entitled to a free NHS flu vaccination from your GP or local pharmacist. Find out if you are eligible today. Find out more Severe COVID-19Severe COVID-19 means that you have pneumonia, which is inflammation (caused by infection) of the lungs themselves, right down into the tiny air sacs (alveoli).Severe COVID-19 is much more likely if you are older or have any of the health conditions that make you vulnerable. Severe COVID is not impossible in the healthy but it is much less common.Patients with severe COVID are very breathless (and may be unable to breathe at a comfortable rate on slight moving around or even at rest) and breathe faster than usual, even when sitting still. People with severe COVID cannot finish a sentence without extra breaths. They may even avoid speaking. Their oxygen levels may have fallen so the urge to breathe faster is strong.Doctors will measure breathing rates when assessing this condition. Normal adults breathe at about 12-18 breaths per minute when they are not thinking about it. In pneumonia the rate rises, sometimes markedly. (Note: these are adult rates. Young children breathe much faster than adults.)If you think that you or someone you know have symptoms like this you should seek urgent medical help by telephone. You can call NHS 111 or the relevant number for your region.If you are too breathless to talk to someone on the phone, or your breathing is becoming rapidly harder and faster at rest, call 999 or get someone to do it for you.In severe COVID-19:You are noticeably breathless and you can do very little.You may be breathless, even when sitting still.You may be unable to complete a sentence when speaking.You may feel you are having to work hard to breathe.Your chest, tummy or back hurts when you breathe.Your temperature is high.Your chest is tight, as if you can't expand it properly.You can't keep up with your breathing, as if you had just sprinted hard (except you haven't).You are not eating or drinking normally.You can't read or watch TV because you are too focused on breathing or feel too unwell.Others think you are confused.Other common symptoms of COVID-19 pneumonia include (and you do not have to have all or even most of them):Rapid and shallow breathing.Rapid heartbeat.Unwell appearance.Lowered blood pressure.Critical COVID-19In severe pneumonia, a condition called ARDS (acute respiratory distress syndrome) can develop. The small air sacs in the lungs become so inflamed and wet that they tend to stick shut, and surfactant cannot do its job as there is too much inflammatory fluid in the alveoli responding to the virus. You need help with inflating your lungs. This is what a ventilator is for. People with critical COVID-19 are very unwell.The most critical of all of these patients develop sepsis, and other bodily organs stop working - a very dangerous situation for the body.The chances of this happening to any previously healthy individual are extremely low, but not zero. Whilst the vast majority of healthy younger people do not develop critical COVID-19, you can never say never in medicine. Worldwide amongst the hundreds of thousands of cases, there have been some young people who have become extremely sick, and even some who have died.The majority of elderly patients also do not develop critical COVID-19, but a significant proportion do. The risk rises with age and with the health conditions that we know make you vulnerable.The number of COVID-19 cases that we now have in the world means that even a small percentage of patients developing sepsis makes for a large number of patients. You can survive critical COVID-19 with help from intensive care, but even that is not always enough, as we are seeing worldwide.The difference between severe and critical COVID-19 is one a hospital healthcare professional will make. Both need to be treated in hospital urgently.You should call 999 or the relevant emergency number for your region immediately if you think you or someone you know have the symptoms of severe or critical COVID-19. Inform the call handler that you think you have coronavirus or COVID-19 symptoms.Dr Mary Lowth is an author or the original author of this leaflet.Read nextCOVID-19 coronavirus: when will we have a vaccine? COVID-19 coronavirus: what can I do under the new rules?Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Related InformationCOVID-19: what you need to know about coronavirusCOVID-19: do you need to worry about coronavirus?COVID-19: the latest UK coronavirus guidelinesCOVID-19: what happens next with the coronavirus outbreak?COVID-19 coronavirus: do I need to self-isolate?  Is it COVID-19 or flu this winter?    7 minutes reading time  18-Dec-23  Will we need a COVID-19 booster vaccine every year?    4 minutes reading time  23-Oct-23  Why it's a good thing if you feel unwell after your COVID-19 booster jab    3 minutes reading time  20-Oct-23  Hi guys I tested positive for covid back in late August, my symptoms were a sore throat then a dry persistent cough but thankfully nothing serious. But then within a few days I began to experience...   ben34157Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Read next COVID-19 coronavirus: when will we have a vaccine?  Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Coronavirus: what are moderate, severe and critical COVID-19?     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/news-and-features/coronavirus-what-are-moderate-severe-and-critical-covid-19Copy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


