# Costochondritis: Symptoms and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Signs and Symptoms    Chest Pain  Costochondritis Last updated by Dr Doug McKechnie   Authored by Dr Katrina Ford   Peer reviewed by Dr Pippa Vincent  Last updated 26 Apr 2023   Originally published 27 Jan 2011   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Chest Pain      Bornholm Disease      Pleurisy      Pneumothorax (Trapped Air in the Chest) In this series     Chest Pain      Bornholm Disease      Pleurisy      Pneumothorax (Trapped Air in the Chest) Costochondritis is a painful chest wall condition, caused by localised inflammation in the joints of the rib cage.In this article   What is costochondritis?   Costochondritis symptoms   How common is costochondritis?   Costochondritis causes   Who develops costochondritis?   When should I contact a doctor?   Costochondritis treatment   What is the outlook?   How does the chest wall work? In This Article     CostochondritisIn this article What is costochondritis?  Costochondritis symptoms  How common is costochondritis?  Costochondritis causes  Who develops costochondritis?  When should I contact a doctor?  Costochondritis treatment  What is the outlook?  How does the chest wall work? What is costochondritis?Costochondritis is a condition of the chest wall that causes pain. People who get chest pain are often frightened they have a heart or lung problem. Fortunately, if the pain is due to costochondritis, there is no need to panic as it is not a life-threatening condition. Costochondritis usually gets better on its own with time.The pain you get if you have costochondritis comes from the protective cage formed by your ribs, and not from the heart or lungs or blood vessels inside your chest. More specifically, it comes from one or more of the joints between your ribs and your breastbone (sternum). These joints have become inflamed if you have costochondritis.See the bottom of this leaflet for information on how the chest wall works.Costochondritis symptomsChest pain, felt at the front of the chest.Typically, it is sharp and stabbing in nature and can be quite severe.The pain is worse with movement, exertion and deep breathing.Pressure over the affected area also causes sharp pain.Some people may feel an aching pain.The pain is usually confined (localised) to a small area but it can spread (radiate) to a wider area.The pain tends to wax and wane and it can settle with a change of position and quiet, shallow breathing.The most common sites of pain are close to the breastbone (sternum), at the level of the 4th, 5th and 6th ribs.Note: without tenderness, the cause of the chest pain is unlikely to be costochondritis. Remember to seek medical advice if you are unsure of the cause of your symptoms (see the section on 'when to see a doctor').Tietze's syndrome causes similar symptoms to costochondritis. However, it also tends to cause swelling at certain tender points on your chest wall. If you have costochondritis, there is nothing there to actually see.Bornholm disease is another similar condition but it often leads to muscle aches and pains, as well as chest pain. See the separate leaflet called Bornholm Disease for more details.How common is costochondritis?It is hard to be sure exactly how common costochondritis is, as lots of people probably have it but don't see a doctor. It seems to be quite common. Of the people with chest pain going to see their GP, about 1 in 5 have a cause related to the muscles, ribs and joints in their chest wall.Costochondritis causesThe basic problem is inflammation but the cause of this is unknown for most people. There are some situations that are associated with inflammation and they include:Chest infections of varying types.Large physical efforts, like lifting heavy objects or repeated bouts of coughing.Accidents which hit the chest, like falls or car accidents.Some types of arthritis.General blood tests available nowGive yourself a check-up with a general blood profile, now available in Patient Access Book now Who develops costochondritis?There is no particular person more at risk of costochondritis than any other. It does tend to affect younger people, especially teenagers and young adults. It can affect children. People performing repetitive movements that strain the chest wall, particularly if they are not used to it, as above, might be more at risk of getting this condition. Some studies suggest women tend to be affected more commonly than men.People with fibromyalgia tend to develop costochondritis more often than others. Fibromyalgia is a long-term (chronic) condition that causes widespread body pains and fatigue. See the separate leaflet called Fibromyalgia for more details.When should I contact a doctor?It can be very difficult to know if your pain is due to costochondritis or whether - and how urgently - to see a doctor. With chest pain, it makes sense to err on the side of caution if you are unsure.If you feel unwell, breathless, dizzy, or sweaty, or if your chest pain is very severe or spreading to your jaw or left arm then treat it as an emergency. Call 999/112/911 for an emergency ambulance.It is more likely that you have costochondritis if:You are young and otherwise healthy.You feel generally well in yourself and have no other symptoms.You have pain which is worse when you move your chest wall or press on it.The pain is relieved with simple painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen.If you have other symptoms in addition to the pain then consult a doctor. This would include if you have:A cough.A high temperature (fever).Breathlessness.Blood in the mucus you cough up (sputum).Pain which spreads to other parts of the body.A rash.A feeling of having a 'thumping heart' (palpitations).Dizziness.Difficulty swallowing.Started to get heartburn or indigestion.Also consult your doctor if the pain gets worse as you exert yourself (for example, on walking up a hill) rather than as you twist your chest around. Pain on exertion is more likely to be due to angina.See the separate leaflet called Chest Pain for more information about the different causes of chest pain.There is no test for costochondritis, but you might be offered other tests to look for other things causing chest pain.Costochondritis treatmentTreatment options for costochondritis include:No treatment. Sometimes it helps just to be reassured there is no serious cause for the chest pain.Relaxation techniques. Worry can make the pain worse. (Indeed, anxiety is a common cause of chest pain.)Simple painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen.Injections of steroids or local anaesthetic medicines if pain is severe and other treatments have not worked.Non-medicinal measures can be tried for relief of pain in costochondritis. Examples of such techniques include:Heat pads.Ice application.Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS).Acupuncture.Gentle stretching exercises.Avoidance of sports or activities that worsen the pain.Physiotherapy or chiropractic therapy to help loosen up the rib cage.With or without treatment, most people with costochondritis get better gradually over time.In extreme cases, an intercostal nerve block can be performed (usually by a doctor specialising in acute pain and/or anaesthetics). This involves injection of a local anaesthetic medicine around the painful ribs.This blocks the nearby intercostal nerve and temporarily disrupts nerve impulses to stop the pain. Nerve blocks can last several weeks or months. In repeated, severe cases of costochondritis, a series of these injections can be given to permanently destroy the nerve causing the pain.What is the outlook?The outlook (prognosis) for costochondritis is generally very good. Most cases of costochondritis are mild and settle reasonably quickly. This happens with or without simple medications. 9 out of 10 people with costochondritis are pain-free after three weeks. In nearly all cases, the condition has completely gone within a year. Occasionally, if you are unlucky, it lasts longer. Costochondritis may return; however, this is unlikely.How does the chest wall work?Costochondritis'Used with permission of Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. All rights reserved.'To understand costochondritis, you need to know a bit about the way the rib cage is put together. The rib cage is a bony structure that protects the lungs. Bones are hard and solid and they can't bend or move much. Your lungs, however, need to move, so that you can breathe.When you take a deep breath in, your rib cage expands. (Try it! You will feel and see your rib cage moving.) In order for the ribs to expand, they need something to allow movement. Cartilage allows this. Cartilage is a softer, flexible (but very strong) material found in joints around the body.Cartilages attach the ribs to the breastbone (sternum) and the breastbone to the collarbones (clavicles). The joints between the ribs and the cartilages are called the costochondral joints. Those between the cartilages and the breastbone are called costosternal joints. Those between the breastbone and the collarbones are called the sternoclavicular joints.The prefix 'costo' simply means related to the ribs. 'Chondr-' means related to the cartilage and '-itis' means inflammation. So, in costochondritis, there is inflammation in either the costochondral, costosternal or sternoclavicular joints (or a combination). This causes pain, which tends to be worse when you move, or when you press down on the affected part.Previous article   Chest Pain Next article  Bornholm Disease  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Schumann JA, Sood T, Parente JJ; CostochondritisGrindstaff TL, Beazell JR, Saliba EN, et al; Treatment of a female collegiate rower with costochondritis: a case report. J Man Manip Ther. 2010 Jun18(2):64-8. doi: 10.1179/106698110X12640740712653.Mott T, Jones G, Roman K; Costochondritis: Rapid Evidence Review. Am Fam Physician. 2021 Jul 1104(1):73-78.Rokicki W, Rokicki M, Rydel M; What do we know about Tietze's syndrome? Kardiochir Torakochirurgia Pol. 2018 Sep15(3):180-182. doi: 10.5114/kitp.2018.78443. Epub 2018 Sep 24.Mettola G, Perricone C; Tietze Syndrome. Mediterr J Rheumatol. 2020 Apr 2431(2):224. doi: 10.31138/mjr.31.2.224. eCollection 2020 Jun.Related InformationCostochondritis and Tietze's Syndrome ProChest PainChest Pain ProMyocardial Perfusion ScanExercise Tolerance Testing (ETT)  What causes pleurisy?    4 minutes reading time  19-May-23  What are the symptoms of costochondritis?    4 minutes reading time  18-May-23  What is the treatment for pleurisy?    4 minutes reading time  11-May-23  What's causing your chest pain?    4 minutes reading time  06-Apr-18  Hi everyone. I just got diagnosed with Tietze's today after suffering chest pain on my right side for 6 weeks. Looking at this discussion board, I can see that I'm lucky to have been diagnosed so...   GuestJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Authored by   Dr Katrina Ford  Last updated by   Dr Doug McKechnie Peer reviewed by  Dr Pippa Vincent Document ID  13605 (v6)  Originally published on   27 January 2011  Last updated on   26 April 2023 Next review date  24 April 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Chest PainNext article Bornholm Disease Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Costochondritis: Symptoms and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/signs-symptoms/chest-pain-leaflet/costochondritisCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


