# Cough Medicines: Chesty Cough and Dry Cough Medicines | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Chest and Lungs    Cough  Cough Medicines Last updated by Dr Caroline Wiggins, MRCGP    Authored by Jenny Whitehall   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP   Last updated 14 Mar 2023   Originally published 15 Mar 2012   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Cough      Common Cold      Viral Cough (Cough Caused by a Virus)      Coughs and Colds in Children      Chronic Persistent Cough in Adults      Coughing up Blood (Haemoptysis) In this series     Cough      Common Cold      Viral Cough (Cough Caused by a Virus)      Coughs and Colds in Children      Chronic Persistent Cough in Adults      Coughing up Blood (Haemoptysis) FCough medicines are commonly bought to treat various types of coughs that occur when you have an upper respiratory tract infection (URTI). Cough medicines that you can buy are often divided into those for a dry or tickly cough, and those for a chesty cough. It is thought that cough medicines do not really work. However, some people feel that they work for them and they are thought to be reasonably safe to use, though it is important to check with a pharmacist if you are taking other medications. Children who are aged 12 years and younger should only be given cough syrups which state they are suitable for the child's age.In this article   What are cough medicines?   How do cough medicines work?   Do cough medicines work?   Which cough medicine should I buy?   Cough medicine for children   Taking other medicines   Cough medicine side-effects   What is the usual length of treatment?   Who cannot take cough medicines? In This Article     Cough MedicinesIn this article What are cough medicines?  How do cough medicines work?  Do cough medicines work?  Which cough medicine should I buy?  Cough medicine for children  Taking other medicines  Cough medicine side-effects  What is the usual length of treatment?  Who cannot take cough medicines? What are cough medicines?Cough medicines or cough syrups aim either to suppress a dry cough, or to help you to cough up the phlegm (mucus) of a chesty cough when you have a URTI. There is no good evidence that they do help. This is partly because many coughs get better quickly on their own anyway, so it is hard to tell if the cough medicine has helped or if the cold has simply got better.Lots of cough medicines are available to buy from pharmacies or supermarkets. They usually contain one or more active ingredient (see the section below).A glycerin, honey and lemon cough medicine is also available to buy. This preparation does not have an active ingredient as such. It is thought to have a soothing action.Cough medicines can also contain other medicines such as paracetamol or ibuprofen. Some contain alcohol.How do cough medicines work?If cough medicines do work, they are thought to work in different ways, depending on what the active ingredient is:Antitussives are said to work by reducing the cough reflex. For example, dextromethorphan.Expectorants try to help loosen secretions, so you cough up the mucus. For example, guaifenesin or ipecacuanha.Antihistamines reduce histamine release. This reduces congestion and decreases the amount of phlegm made by the lungs. Examples are brompheniramine, chlorphenamine, diphenhydramine, doxylamine, promethazine or triprolidine.Decongestants cause the blood vessels in the lungs and nose to narrow (constrict), which reduces congestion in the nose. Examples are phenylephrine, pseudoephedrine, ephedrine, oxymetazoline or xylometazoline.Are you eligible for a free NHS flu vaccination?You may be entitled to a free NHS flu vaccination from your GP or local pharmacist. Find out if you are eligible today. Find out more Do cough medicines work?There is no good evidence from research studies that cough medicines work. It is thought that they have little benefit on the cough (or cold) symptoms. However, some people feel that they work for them and these cough medicines are considered to be safe for the vast majority of adults and for children over 6 years old.Which cough medicine should I buy?If you have a dry cough, a preparation containing an antitussive such as dextromethorphan is the most suitable to try. If you have a chesty cough, a preparation containing an expectorant such as guaifenesin or ipecacuanha is the most suitable to try. Your pharmacist can advise you which one may be suitable for you. If you are buying these cough medicines from the supermarket, the box should clearly state which type of cough it aims to help and what the ingredients are..Cough medicine for childrenChildren under 6 years oldChildren under 6 years of age should only be given simple cough syrups such as glycerin, honey, and lemon. Cough syrup boxes will show what age of child it is appropriate for. Do not give children who are younger than 6 years old cough syrups with any of the active ingredients listed above (antitussives, expectorants, antihistamines, or decongestants). This is because the risk of a young child having a side-effect to one these preparations is greater than any possible benefit of the cough medicine.Children aged 6 to 12Children older than 6 years old can usually take cough medicines safely. In the UK, they are only sold for the use of children aged 6 to 12 with the advice of a pharmacist. Consider other soothing measures first as any cough medicines can have side-effects.Taking other medicinesAlways check with your pharmacist before buying any cough medicines from the chemist or supermarket to see if they are safe to take with any other medicines you may be taking.Some cough medicines contain other medicines as well. For example, some may contain paracetamol or ibuprofen, and some contain alcohol. This is important if you are already taking paracetamol or ibuprofen to help the symptoms of your infection (for example, a high temperature). This is because you may take too much paracetamol or ibuprofen (an overdose) but not be aware of it. Taking too much paracetamol can seriously damage your liver.If you are taking a a particular type of antidepressant - a monoamine-oxidase inhibitors (MAOI) - this can react with certain ingredients in cough medicines. Taking these together can cause a very large sudden increase in blood pressure, or make you very excitable or depressed. In particular, people taking MAOIs should avoid dextromethorphan, ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine while they are taking an MAOI antidepressant and for two weeks after it is stopped:Dextromethorphan when taken with an MAOI antidepressant may make you very excitable or depressed.Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine and phenylpropanolamine, when taken at the same time as an MAOI antidepressant, may cause very large increases in blood pressure.Editor's noteDr Krishna Vakharia, 21st February 2024A note on pseudoephedrine-containing products.The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency has issued a caution for those using pseudoephedrine-containing products.There have been rare reports of two conditions associated with pseudoephedrine use - posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) and reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome (RCVS).Following a review by MHRA - the safety information of all pseudoephedrine-containing medicines will be updated to provide clearer descriptions of these risks and potential risk factors for these conditions for both patients and healthcare professionals.PRES- also known as reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome (RPLS). This is a rare condition in which parts of the brain are affected by swelling - usually as a result of an underlying cause. Symptoms include headache, changes in vision, and seizures, with some developing other neurological symptoms such as confusion or weakness of one or more limbs. Most patients fully recover.RCVS - is a neurological disorder. There is a sudden onset of severe headache associated with narrowing of the blood vessels that supply blood to the brain. On brain imaging the narrowing of the blood vessels can look similar to a “string of beads”. Very rarely, RCVS can present as a medical emergency with strokes (ischaemic strokes or bleed), seizure or as brain swelling. Usually, the narrowing resolves by itself within three months, and most patients fully recover.MHRA is reminding users that:Pseudoephedrine is for short term use only and should only be used to relieve symptoms of nasal and sinus congestion in colds, flu, and allergies.No one should take pseudoephedrine if they have high blood pressure (hypertension) or hypertension not controlled by their medicines, or if they have severe acute (sudden onset) or chronic (long-term) kidney disease or kidney failure.If you experience a severe headache that develops very quickly or you suddenly feel sick or are vomiting, confused or experiencing seizures or changes in vision while taking this medicine, stop taking it immediately and seek urgent medical attention.A reminder that this is extremely rare -there have only been 4 cases reported by the Yellow Card scheme to date- out of 4 million packets sold in 2022.Cough medicine side-effectsMost people who take cough medicines do not have side-effects. Some cough medicines (for example, diphenhydramine) can cause drowsiness. If you are drowsy after taking a cough medicine, you should not drive and you should not operate machinery. The leaflet that comes with your cough medicine will state if the medicine can cause drowsiness.Note: the above is not the full list of side-effects for these cough medicines. Please see the leaflet that comes with your particular brand for a full list of possible side-effects and cautions.What is the usual length of treatment?As with all medicines, cough medicines should only be taken for the shortest period of time necessary, most people only use a cough medicine for a few days. In general, most coughs do not last more than 2-3 weeks. If your cough does last longer than three weeks then you should go to see your doctor.Who cannot take cough medicines?Most people can take a cough medicine. The exception is children under the age of 6 years. These children should only be given cough syrups with no active ingredients (see above). Cough medicines for children aged 6 to 12 are only sold with the advice of a pharmacist. If you are taking any other medicines or you are not sure if you should take a cough medicine, check with your pharmacist.How to use the Yellow Card SchemeIf you think you have had a side-effect to one of your medicines you can report this on the Yellow Card Scheme. You can do this online at www.mhra.gov.uk/yellowcard.The Yellow Card Scheme is used to make pharmacists, doctors and nurses aware of any new side-effects that medicines or any other healthcare products may have caused. If you wish to report a side-effect, you will need to provide basic information about:The side-effect.The name of the medicine which you think caused it.The person who had the side-effect.Your contact details as the reporter of the side-effect.It is helpful if you have your medication - and/or the leaflet that came with it - with you while you fill out the report.Previous article   Coughing up Blood (Haemoptysis)Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Cough; NICE CKS, May 2021 (UK access only)Over-the-counter cough and cold medicines for children; Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), 2014British National Formulary (BNF); NICE Evidence Services (UK access only)Smith SM, Schroeder K, Fahey T; Over-the-counter (OTC) medications for acute cough in children and adults in community settings. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Nov 2411:CD001831. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001831.pub5.Morice A, Kardos P; Comprehensive evidence-based review on European antitussives. BMJ Open Respir Res. 2016 Aug 53(1):e000137. doi: 10.1136/bmjresp-2016-000137. eCollection 2016.Update on MHRA safety review of medicines containing pseudoephedrine; Medicines & Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, GOV.UK (February 2024)Related InformationCoughViral Cough (Cough Caused by a Virus)  Do any natural cold remedies work?    6 minutes reading time  09-Feb-24  What to eat when you have a cold    5 minutes reading time  22-Dec-23  Can you catch a cold in summer?    5 minutes reading time  02-Jul-19  What does your snot say about your health?    4 minutes reading time  04-Feb-19  hi, I would like some advice regarding exercises that could help improve lung healththank youCharles   charles99475Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Authored by   Jenny Whitehall  Last updated by   Dr Caroline Wiggins, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP Document ID  13832 (v4)  Originally published on   15 March 2012  Last updated on   14 March 2023 Next review date  16 February 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Coughing up Blood (Haemoptysis)Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Cough Medicines: Chesty Cough and Dry Cough Medicines     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/chest-lungs/cough-leaflet/cough-medicinesCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up

