# Cough and Cold: Causes and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Chest and Lungs    Cough  Coughs and Colds in Children Last updated by Dr Doug McKechnie, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP   Last updated 12 Feb 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Cough      Common Cold      Viral Cough (Cough Caused by a Virus)      Chronic Persistent Cough in Adults      Coughing up Blood (Haemoptysis)      Cough Medicines In this series     Cough      Common Cold      Viral Cough (Cough Caused by a Virus)      Chronic Persistent Cough in Adults      Coughing up Blood (Haemoptysis)      Cough Medicines Coughs and colds are usually caused by infection with a germ called a virus. They normally clear away on their own. Antibiotic medicines don't help, and can cause harms, such as diarrhoea and vomiting. Paracetamol or ibuprofen may ease some of the symptoms. Make sure the child has enough to drink.In this article   What causes coughs and colds?   What are the symptoms of cough and cold?   What are the treatments for coughs and colds?   Cold and cough remedies   Other treatments   What symptoms should I look out for?   When should I see a doctor? In This Article     Coughs and Colds in ChildrenIn this article What causes coughs and colds?  What are the symptoms of cough and cold?  What are the treatments for coughs and colds?  Cold and cough remedies  Other treatments  What symptoms should I look out for?  When should I see a doctor? What causes coughs and colds?Most coughs and colds are caused by germs called viruses. Many different viruses can infect the nose and throat. They are passed on by coughing and sneezing the virus into the air. An average preschool and primary school child has 3-8 coughs or colds per year. Some children will have more than this. Sometimes several coughs or colds occur one after the other. Viral infections are extremely common in young children. One recent study found that cold- and cough-causing viruses can be found in the noses of under-5s for half of the year. A child who lives with people who smoke has an increased risk of developing coughs and colds, and the colds they get may last longer.What are the symptoms of cough and cold?The common symptoms are a cough and a runny nose. The cough is often worse at night. Coughing does not damage the lungs. Coughing is part of the body's natural defence against more severe lung infections, like pneumonia.In addition, a child may have a raised temperature (fever), a sore throat, headache, and tiredness; they may be off their food. Sometimes children may be sick (vomit) after a bout of coughing.A build-up of mucus behind the eardrums may cause dulled hearing or mild earache.Very young children often sleep a lot when they are unwell.Are you eligible for a free NHS flu vaccination?You may be entitled to a free NHS flu vaccination from your GP or local pharmacist. Find out if you are eligible today. Find out more What are the treatments for coughs and colds?There is no magic cure! Typically, symptoms are worse in the first 2-3 days, and then ease over the next few days as the immune system clears the virus. An irritating cough may linger for up to 2-4 weeks after other symptoms have gone. Antibiotics do not kill viruses, so are of no use for common coughs and colds. Antibiotics have harms, such as causing diarrhoea and vomiting. Using them too much can lead to bacteria in the body developing resistance to the antibiotic, meaning the treatment may not work if it is later needed for a serious infection.Supportive treatmentCoughs and colds often do not need any treatment.Make sure your child has enough to drink. Low body fluid (dehydration) may develop if a child has a raised temperature (fever) and does not drink much.Resting probably helps the body to fight off viruses more quickly.Treatment to ease symptomsParacetamol can ease aches and pains, headaches and fever. Ibuprofen is an alternative. Both are sold in pharmacies in liquid form for children. There are various brands - ask the pharmacist if you are unsure what is suitable.Fever itself isn't harmful. A fever is one of the body's defences against infection, and helps to fight off infections. Having a fever often makes people feel unwell. If that's the case, anti-fever medicines such as paracetamol and ibuprofen can help them feel better.However, if a child has a fever but is otherwise comfortable and feeling well, they don't need medication to reduce their temperature.Saline drops for blocked noseA popular treatment for a blocked nose in a baby is to put a few drops of salt water (saline) into the nose just before feeds. Some people feel that this helps to clear the nose to make feeding easier. There is little scientific evidence as to how well this works, but it may be worth a try if feeding is difficult. You can buy saline drops from pharmacies.Vapour rubsVapour rubs are another popular treatment. They can be applied to the chest and back. Avoid application directly to the nostril area. Again, there is little scientific evidence as to how well they work.Steam inhalationInhaling steam can also help relieve congestion and coughing. The safest way to do this with children is to sit in the bathroom with a hot shower/hot taps running.Cough sweetsSucking menthol or other medicated sweets can help ease irritating coughs and sore throats in older children.Cold and cough remediesCough or cold remedies may be advertised and are sold in pharmacies. They contain various ingredients or combinations of ingredients such as paracetamol, decongestants, antihistamines and cough remedies. However, there is no convincing evidence that these cough and cold remedies work. Also, they may have side-effects such as allergic reactions, problems with sleeping or making you see or hear things that are not really there (hallucinations).In March 2009 an important statement was issued by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). It said that parents and carers should no longer use over-the-counter (OTC) cough and cold medicines in children aged under 6 years. For 6- to 12-year-olds these medicines continue to be available (as there is less risk of side-effects in older children). However, they are only sold in pharmacies, with clearer advice on the packaging and from the pharmacist. Note: paracetamol and ibuprofen are not classed as cough and cold medicines and can still be given to children.A warm drink made with honey and lemon juice can be as soothing to an irritated or sore throat as cough medicine that you buy at the chemist. Please note that honey should not be given to babies under 1 year old.Cough is a difficult symptom to control. Sometimes it seems as if your child is coughing all the time. They may cough so hard that they are sick. This is distressing but it does not necessarily indicate that they need additional treatment from a doctor.Other treatmentsZinc supplementsPrevious research studies suggest that a mineral called zinc appears to reduce the severity of cold symptoms in healthy children. A recent review of the research on zinc supplements and the common cold found that zinc supplements may reduce the length and severity of cold symptoms, when taken within 24 hours of the first symptoms of a cold. Zinc supplements may also help to prevent colds. However, there were possible side-effects such as unpleasant taste and feeling sick (nausea). The review concluded that it is not yet clear whether zinc should be recommended as treatment for colds. More studies need to be done to work out which dose should be taken and for how long. More details can be found under 'Further Reading and References' at the end of this leaflet.Vitamin CThere has also been research looking at vitamin C for preventing or treating colds. A recent review found that taking vitamin C regularly did not seem to prevent colds in the ordinary population. However, it did seem to reduce the length and severity of symptoms. Also, in trials where people were exposed to short periods of extreme physical stress (for example, marathon runners and skiers) vitamin C halved the risk of developing a cold. More research is needed to answer the question of whether vitamin C can help once the cold symptoms have already started.Vitamin DA study published in early 2017 revealed that vitamin D is also useful for preventing colds. Many people in the UK have low levels of vitamin D during the winter, and Public Health England now recommends that everyone should consider taking a vitamin D supplement during the winter.Herbal remediesEchinacea (a herbal treatment) and garlic have traditionally been used for treating colds. However, recent reviews of research could not find any evidence that either is helpful. The MHRA also advises that echinacea should not be given to children under 12 years old. This is because of rare allergic reactions, which can be severe.Black elderberry extract is another natural remedy that has been used traditionally. There is some evidence that it can help to prevent and shorten colds.What symptoms should I look out for?Most coughs and colds get better without complications. Sometimes a more serious infection develops from an initial viral infection. For example, an ear infection, chest infection or pneumonia. Symptoms to look out for that may mean your child has more than just a cold include:Breathing problems - wheezing, fast breathing, noisy breathing or difficulty with breathing.Being unable to swallow (this may show up as excessive drooling).Drowsiness.Unusual irritability or persistent crying, in a baby, or if the baby is not taking feeds.A rash.Chest pains.Persistent high temperatures lasting more than five days.Fever in a baby aged less than 3 months (higher than 38°C). Fever in children under 3 months is more likely to be due to a serious infection, and these children should see a doctor urgently. The exception is fever occurring within 48 hours after vaccinations, as long as there are no other worrying signs.Very bad (severe) headache, sore throat, earache or swollen glands.Fluid or pus coming out of one, or both, ears.Signs of dehydration - like having sunken eyes, feeling drowsy, or not passing any urine for 12 hours or more.A cough that persists for longer than 3-4 weeks.Symptoms getting worse rather than better after about five days of a cold.Symptoms (other than a irritating cough) lasting more than about ten days. This is particularly important if your child has mucus or phlegm (sputum) which is green, yellow or brown, as it may indicate infection with other germs called bacteria.Any symptom that you cannot explain.When should I see a doctor?Most children with coughs and colds can be managed at home without seeing a doctor.If your child has one or more of the symptoms or signs listed above, or you are concerned about them, you should speak to a doctor urgently. This is particularly important if your child has a long-term illness or medical condition - for example, chest/breathing/heart problems or neurological disease.See the Fever in Children (High Temperature) leaflet for more.Doctors are skilled at checking children over to rule out serious illness. They may not be able to prescribe anything more effective for a common cough or cold, but a check-over can be reassuring.Previous article   Viral Cough (Cough Caused by a Virus) Next article  Chronic Persistent Cough in Adults  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Recommendations for the assessment and management of cough in children; British Thoracic Society Cough Guideline Group - BMJ (2008)Cough (acute): antimicrobial prescribing; NICE Guidance (February 2019)Over-the-counter cough and cold medicines for children; Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), 2014Common cold; NICE CKS, February 2022 (UK access only)Kenealy T, Arroll B; Antibiotics for the common cold and acute purulent rhinitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Jun 46:CD000247. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000247.pub3.Advice on Vitamin D; Public Health England, July 2016Nahas R, Balla A; Complementary and alternative medicine for prevention and treatment of the common cold. Can Fam Physician. 2011 Jan57(1):31-6.Karsch-Volk M, Barrett B, Kiefer D, et al; Echinacea for preventing and treating the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Feb 202:CD000530. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000530.pub3.Hemila H, Chalker E; Vitamin C for preventing and treating the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Jan 311:CD000980. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000980.pub4.Singh M, Das RR; Zinc for the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Jun 18(6):CD001364. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001364.pub4.Lissiman E, Bhasale AL, Cohen M; Garlic for the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Nov 11(11):CD006206. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006206.pub4.Byington CL, Ampofo K, Stockmann C, et al; Community Surveillance of Respiratory Viruses Among Families in the Utah Better Identification of Germs-Longitudinal Viral Epidemiology (BIG-LoVE) Study. Clin Infect Dis. 2015 Oct 1561(8):1217-24. doi: 10.1093/cid/civ486. Epub 2015 Aug 4.Secondhand Smoke; Action on Smoking and Health, March 2020Related InformationViral Cough (Cough Caused by a Virus)Common ColdChronic Cough in Children ProTreating Infections (PHE) ProCommon Cold (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment) Pro  Do any natural cold remedies work?    6 minutes reading time  09-Feb-24  What to eat when you have a cold    5 minutes reading time  22-Dec-23  Is it whooping cough or just a cold?    5 minutes reading time  09-May-19  Can you catch a cold in summer?    5 minutes reading time  02-Jul-19  hi, I would like some advice regarding exercises that could help improve lung healththank youCharles   charles99475Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Doug McKechnie, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP Document ID  4227 (v42)  Last updated on   12 February 2023 Next review date  11 February 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Viral Cough (Cough Caused by a Virus)Next article Chronic Persistent Cough in Adults Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Cough and Cold: Causes and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/chest-lungs/cough-leaflet/coughs-and-colds-in-childrenCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


