# Cow's Milk Protein Allergy: Symptoms and Alternatives | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Allergies, Blood & Immune System    Food Allergy and Intolerance  Cow's Milk Protein Allergy Last updated by Dr Hayley Willacy   Authored by Dr Jan Sambrook   Peer reviewed by Dr Toni Hazell  Last updated 29 Mar 2023   Originally published 12 Oct 2015   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Food Allergy and Intolerance      Nut Allergy      Lactose Intolerance      Oral Allergy Syndrome In this series     Food Allergy and Intolerance      Nut Allergy      Lactose Intolerance      Oral Allergy Syndrome Cow's milk protein allergy is one of the most common food allergies seen in children. It is most commonly seen during the first year of life. Many children who have been allergic to cow's milk protein become tolerant to it by the time they are 5 years old.In this article   What is cow's milk protein allergy?   Cow's milk protein allergy symptoms   How common is cow's milk protein allergy?   Allergic reactions to milk   Non-immunoglobulin E-mediated reactions (non-IgE-mediated allergy)   How to diagnose cow's milk protein allergy   Immunoglobulin E-mediated reactions (IgE-mediated allergy)   Milk alternatives   Lactose intolerance In This Article     Cow's Milk Protein AllergyIn this article What is cow's milk protein allergy?  Cow's milk protein allergy symptoms  How common is cow's milk protein allergy?  Allergic reactions to milk  Non-immunoglobulin E-mediated reactions (non-IgE-mediated allergy)  How to diagnose cow's milk protein allergy  Immunoglobulin E-mediated reactions (IgE-mediated allergy)  Milk alternatives  Lactose intolerance What is cow's milk protein allergy?Cow's milk protein allergy is an allergic condition which is triggered by drinking cow's milk or by drinking or eating products made from cow's milk such as cheese, cream and yoghurt.Cow's milk protein allergy symptomsSkin symptoms, such as itching, redness, flushing, rashes (like urticaria) and eczema.Gut (digestive tract) symptoms, such as feeling sick (nausea), being sick (vomiting), gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, constipation and abdominal (tummy) pain. There may be blood and/or mucus in the stools. In very young children there may be irritability and colic, food refusal and faltering growth.Breathing (respiratory) symptoms, such as a runny or itchy nose, cough, shortness of breath and wheezing.The symptoms are often vague and sometimes it is very difficult for a definite diagnosis to be made.How common is cow's milk protein allergy?It is difficult to know exactly how common it is because of differences in classifications. It is thought to be the second most common food allergy after egg. Cow's milk protein allergy occurs in about 7% of babies who have formula milk, but in only about 0.5% of exclusively breast-fed babies, who also usually have milder reactions. Exclusive breastfeeding may also protect babies from developing an allergy to cow's milk protein after they are weaned. It usually shows itself by 1 year of age.Cow's milk protein allergy is more likely in children who have other allergic (or atopic) conditions such as asthma, eczema or hay fever, or if close family members have those conditions.What is cow's milk protein allergy?Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGPSuffer from hay fever?Book an appointment with a local pharmacist today Book now Allergic reactions to milkThere are two different processes which cause allergic reactions in the body; cow's milk can trigger either of these in some people. Some people develop symptoms of both types of reaction.Non-immunoglobulin E-mediated reactions (non-IgE-mediated allergy)These are slow reactions which can occur hours, or more usually days, after consuming milk. The usual range is from 2-72 hours. There can be a skin reaction such as eczema, tummy (abdominal) symptoms such as pain, reflux or colic or breathing (respiratory) symptoms.How to diagnose cow's milk protein allergyExcluding milkThe best way to find out if the child has this kind of allergy is to exclude cow's milk from their diet. Milk needs to be excluded for at least two weeks, as the symptoms caused by slow reactions also take quite a long time to settle.Challenge testIf the symptoms settle when milk is removed from the diet, a challenge test can be done in which the child has a small amount of milk. If the milk causes the same reaction as before, the diagnosis can be confirmed. It may take several days for the reaction to show. A challenge test can be repeated every few months, as the child is likely to grow out of this allergy with time.For babies who are bottle-fed, there is special formula milk available on prescription. This has the proteins broken down so that they do not cause the allergic reaction.Vitamin supplementsMothers who are breastfeeding need to exclude milk and milk-containing foods from their diet. They should be prescribed a supplement of calcium and vitamin D, so that they don't become deficient in these nutrients.DietOlder babies and children who are on a cow's milk-free diet for confirmed allergy should see a specialist children's (paediatric) dietician who can make sure the diet is balanced and contains enough calcium.It is important to read the labels on food that you buy. Some milk products which are used as ingredients may have names such as casein, whey or curd. More familiar dairy products such as butter, yoghurt and cheese are also found in many packaged foods.Most children with this kind of allergy grow out of it by the time they are 3 years old.Immunoglobulin E-mediated reactions (IgE-mediated allergy)These are usually fast reactions which can cause skin rashes and needing to be sick (vomiting). They occur within minutes to up to two hours of the milk being consumed. They are triggered by the body releasing a chemical called histamine, so antihistamine medicine can be used to treat the symptoms. It is extremely rare that cow's milk causes a life-threatening anaphylactic reaction.How to diagnoseThis type of allergy can be diagnosed with a skin prick test or a blood test. If this type of allergy is suspected, the child would usually be referred to a children's doctor (paediatrician) who would arrange for the test to be done in hospital. Advice from a dietician is also recommended.Most children with this kind of allergy grow out of it by the time they are 5 years old. If the reaction has been severe, it may be safest to carry out a challenge test in hospital.A referral to a paediatrician should be made for either type of reaction if:The child is not growing well.There have been any severe reactions.Multiple food allergy is suspected.Mixed IgE- and non-IgE-mediated allergySometimes there can be a mixture of the two types of allergic reaction. This causes a combination of the two types of allergic responses.Milk alternativesIf cow's milk protein allergy is suspected then your doctor will advise a completely cow's-milk-free diet until the child is 9-12 months old. This should be for at least six months. Your doctor can prescribe formula milk suitable for your baby. There are several different types of milk available.Hydrolysed milkExtensively hydrolysed milk is usually tried first. The protein in hydrolysed milk is broken down (hydrolysed) into smaller pieces so that it does not trigger a reaction. Examples of hydrolysed milks are Similac Alimentum®, Nutramigen Lipil® 1 and 2 and Pepti® 1, 2 and Junior.AA formulaIf a baby is still having symptoms on a hydrolysed formula then they can try an amino acid (AA) formula. This is sometimes tried first if the allergy is severe or if there are multiple allergies. The protein in AA formula is completely broken down into its smallest units, called amino acids. This should prevent any cow's milk protein reaction occurring. Examples of amino acid formulas are Neocate® and Nutramigen® AA.Under the age of 6 months, babies should have either breast milk or specially developed infant formula milk. This should remain their main drink up to the age of 1 year. Cow's milk can then be reintroduced gradually.Other alternativesSome people give their children goat's milk or other types of milk which are believed to be more easily digestible than cow's milk. In fact, the proteins in other available mammal milks are very similar to those in cow's milk. Therefore, changing to goat's milk rarely causes improvement in confirmed cow's milk protein allergy.Using milk which is low in a sugar called lactose (lactose-free milk) will not be helpful. This is because it is the protein and not the lactose in cow's milk which is causing the problem.Soya milk is not generally recommended for children who are allergic to cow's milk. Soya is another common cause of childhood food allergies and those who have one allergy are more likely to develop others. It should not be used as a main drink for babies aged under 6 months. However, it may be recommended by a healthcare professional after that time if the child is not allergic to it.Lactose intoleranceLactose intolerance is a different condition from cow's milk protein allergy. It occurs because the body cannot digest a sugar called lactose found in milk, rather than a protein. It is very common worldwide but tends to develop in later childhood or in adulthood.Previous article   Nut Allergy Next article  Lactose Intolerance  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Food allergy in children and young people; NICE Clinical Guideline (February 2011, minor update 2018)Cow's milk allergy in children; NICE CKS, August 2021 (UK access only)Koletzko S, Niggemann B, Arato A, et al; Diagnostic approach and management of cow's-milk protein allergy in infants and children: ESPGHAN GI Committee practical guidelines. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2012 Aug55(2):221-9. doi: 10.1097/MPG.0b013e31825c9482.Cow's milk allergy; Allergy UKEmmert V, Lendvai-Emmert D, Eklics K, et al; Current Practice in Pediatric Cow's Milk Protein Allergy-Immunological Features and Beyond. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Mar 624(5):5025. doi: 10.3390/ijms24055025.Related InformationFood Allergy and IntoleranceCow's Milk Protein Allergy (CMPA) ProSkin Prick Allergy TestAllergiesAnaphylaxis  How to cope with a nut allergy at Christmas    6 minutes reading time  16-Dec-22  Cow's milk allergy: Which dairy-free milks are suitable for children?    5 minutes reading time  15-Dec-22  Could you have a nightshade allergy?    5 minutes reading time  22-May-19  Are private allergy tests worth it? (NHS Allergy Testing)    6 minutes reading time  24-Jan-18  Hello....I am a 43 years old male with generaklly in good health.Symptoms : Upper back discomfort and pain while smelling perfume, air freshener or cooking then it can move into the chest in front....   yaz_34049Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Authored by   Dr Jan Sambrook  Last updated by   Dr Hayley Willacy Peer reviewed by  Dr Toni Hazell Document ID  29111 (v3)  Originally published on   12 October 2015  Last updated on   29 March 2023 Next review date  27 March 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Nut AllergyNext article Lactose Intolerance Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Cow's Milk Protein Allergy: Symptoms and Alternatives     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/allergies-blood-immune/food-allergy-and-intolerance/cows-milk-protein-allergyCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


