# Dealing With Depression: Mild Depression Self Help | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Mental Health    Depression  Dealing With Depression Last updated by Dr Hayley Willacy   Peer reviewed by Dr Toni Hazell  Last updated 30 Nov 2022         Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Depression      Antidepressants      Suicidal Thoughts In this series     Depression      Antidepressants      Suicidal Thoughts Depression often gets better without treatment but it can take several months. During this time your symptoms may become intrusive and affect the way you live your life.What are treatments for depression?Prof Swaran Singh, FRCPsychHow to deal with mild depressionThere is much you can do yourself to deal with the symptoms of depression, once you have been pointed in the right direction. This is sometimes referred to as guided self-help. There's a lot of advice out there - on the internet, in a leaflet such as this, in magazines and books and from professionals such as GPs, practice nurses and counsellors.Don't bottle it upDon't try to 'soldier on' with your depression. You may try to hide your feelings in the hope that your depression will go away. You may fear that revealing that you have depression is a sign of weakness. This may be aggravated by unkind remarks from acquaintances that you should 'pull your socks up'.Trying to suppress your depression is never a good idea and will only make you worse. This leaflet shows you how to understand your symptoms, that depression is an illness and that it is very common. Spending time being open and honest with your family and friends will help them understand and they can be a good source of support for you.Keep yourself occupiedIf you are depressed, your natural reaction may be to withdraw from the world. However this can often worsen depression.. You need to increase your activity, (not reduce it) to improve your mood. Getting out from under that duvet and engaging with life may be very hard to start with, but it is the first step on your road to recovery.Make a list of activities you enjoy.Engage with people.Participate in activities.Do some exercise.Making a listYou will need to get motivated; otherwise you may spend the entire day staring out of the window. Make a daily plan of the things you need to do. Add in a few 'treat' activities that you normally enjoy (and maybe don't usually have enough time for).Keep it simple and choose activities that don't need a lot of organising, such as a walk in the park or listening to music. Activities which bring you into contact with friends, family or pets are useful,Exercise has been found to be beneficial. In some groups of people where taking medication may be problematic, the effects of exercise may be similar to antidepressant treatment. Additionally it is unlikely to cause unpleasant side-effects and is regarded as an essential part of a healthy lifestyle.Keeping a diaryTick off each activity once it is done. At the end of the day, look back and see what you have achieved and what you have enjoyed. Don't be surprised if you don't enjoy some of the activities you list to start with. Give it time; the enjoyment will come back. Just think of it as therapy in the first instance. Rate your enjoyment from 1 to 10. You can see which activities you most enjoy and how you are progressing over time.Avoiding what is unhelpfulYou may list activities which you think are going to make you feel better but actually make you feel worse. Drinking alcohol, watching TV all day, unhealthy sleeping patterns or staying in bed are typical examples. By keeping a daily diary you should be able to identify these unhelpful activities. Reduce the amount of time you spend on them and increase those that have brought you pleasure or a sense of achievement, to compensate.Solving problemsProblems that you used to solve in your stride may seem insurmountable when you are depressed. Fear not - help is at hand.Write the problem down, including as much detail as possible:Write down possible solutions using the following approach:Did you solve a similar problem in the past and if so how did you tackle it?What would a friend do?What are the possible solutions? (Be creative, write the silliest or most impractical solutions first.)Break your solution down into steps and tick them off as you achieve each step.The vicious cycleDepression can make you lack motivation, energy levels and feel physically unwell. It may be easier to avoid activities than to tackle them. You may then feel guilty and start to get angry with yourself. This in turn can cause lack of self-esteem and make you feel even more depressed. Understanding how depression affects your thinking can help you break this vicious cycle.Make a list of any thoughts that have fallen into any of the categories below in the last couple of weeks:Gloomy thoughtsWhen you are depressed, your image of yourself may suffer. You may feel you are worthless, lazy or unattractive. You may feel more sensitive about what other people think of you and imagine that you have become less popular among your friends.CatastrophisingThis means jumping to the worst conclusion. If a family member is late, you immediately picture them being rushed to hospital in an ambulance. Or if you haven't heard from a friend for a few days, you assume you've said something to upset them.Over-generalisingThis means drawing wide conclusions from one small detail. If someone spoke sharply to you at work, you may think: 'All my colleagues hate me.' Or if you run out of milk, you may think: 'I'm a total disaster and useless at organising my life.'Focusing on the negativesThis means over-exaggerating setbacks whilst ignoring all the good things in your life. For example, you may focus on a negative comment someone has made at work, whilst taking no notice of the praise other colleagues have given you. Or you may criticise yourself for not achieving everything on your list of tasks but ignore all the things you did manage to do.Taking the blame unnecessarilyThis means blaming yourself for no good reason. For example, if a co-worker is off-hand with you, you immediately wonder what you have done wrong. It may be that the other person has just had a bad day or is preoccupied.Guessing another's thoughts or predicting the futureA neighbour who normally stops in the street for a chat passes by with just a wave. You immediately think: 'I must have upset her last time we spoke.' In reality, she may just be late for an appointment. You may be convinced that things are not going to go well at an interview and think: 'I know they won't offer me the job, so I won't bother going.'Breaking the cycleDon't beat yourself up if any of the thinking patterns above look familiar to you. Celebrate the fact that you are beginning to recognise them in yourself. You will now be in a position to stop them from affecting your mood.Whatever it is that has upset you, sort it out into three parts:What happened?What did I think?What did I feel?For example:Your best friend ignored you all evening and chatted to someone else.You thought: 'She finds the other person better company than me.'You felt unwanted and inferior.Various techniques can be used to break the cycle.BalancingThis means cancelling out the negative thought with a positive thought.Using the above example:"She finds the other person better company than me.' This could be balanced with: 'She bought me a great present for my birthday.'It may be worth keeping a diary of events, with columns for feelings, negative thoughts and balancing thoughts.It's known that people who are depressed are not very good at recording details, so keeping a diary will help. Diaries are useful - not only to help with the balancing technique but also to record positive experiences such as praise from a colleague or a compliment from a partner.Challenge long-held viewsYou may be your own worst critic and you may have developed long-held negative opinions about yourself. For example, you may think you are lazy, not well liked or not particularly bright. These criticisms are often imagined and have no basis in reality. Imagine that you were trying to cheer up a friend who had these thoughts. Look for evidence that supports the opposite view. Writing things down may help.MindfulnessThis is a technique which has become increasingly popular as a way of getting 'in tune' with your thoughts and bodily feelings. It can be used to help manage anxiety and boost your mood. In a nutshell it involves focusing on what is happening in the present and not being distracted by the past or the future.One exercise involves concentrating on your breathing whilst observing in an objective way whatever else is happening to your mind and body. If thoughts come into your mind, acknowledge them but bring your attention back to your breathing. You may notice physical feelings, emotions and sounds: notice them but let them drift away, and come back to your breathing. If you do become distracted, recognise that this has happened but just bring your focus back on to your breathing,The more you practise this technique, the easier it will be to deal with the negative thoughts that come into your mind during a bout of depression.You can find out more about mindfulness from our leaflet.Previous article   Suicidal ThoughtsAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Depression in adults: treatment and management; NICE guideline (June 2022)Depression; NICE CKS, September 2022 (UK access only)Adult Improving Access to Psychological Therapies programme; NHS England, 2017Bailey AP, Hetrick SE, Rosenbaum S, et al; Treating depression with physical activity in adolescents and young adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Psychol Med. 2018 May48(7):1068-1083. doi: 10.1017/S0033291717002653. Epub 2017 Oct 10.Tomlinson-Perez S, Machaczek KK, Firth J, et al; Evaluation of the uptake, retention and effectiveness of exercise referral schemes for the management of mental health conditions in primary care: a systematic review. BMC Public Health. 2022 Feb 722(1):249. doi: 10.1186/s12889-022-12638-7.Duggal HS; Self-Management of Depression: Beyond the Medical Model. Perm J. 201923. pii: 18-295. doi: 10.7812/TPP/18-295. Epub 2019 May 31.Myers A, Chesebrough L, Hu R, et al; Evaluating Commercially Available Mobile Apps for Depression Self-Management. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2021 Jan 252020:906-914. eCollection 2020.Related InformationScreening for Depression in Primary Care ProSertraline (Contulen, Lustral, Zoloft)Fluoxetine (Olena, Prozac, Prozep)Paroxetine (Seroxat)Depression in Children and Adolescents Pro  How to improve your self-esteem and be kinder to yourself    5 minutes reading time  19-Feb-24  Can hugging be good for your health?    6 minutes reading time  13-Feb-24  Daylight Savings Time: Why the clocks changing can affect our health    5 minutes reading time  24-Oct-23  How to deal with empty nest syndrome at Christmas    5 minutes reading time  22-Dec-22  The last year of my life has been a brutal one. At the age of 22, I am in the lowest of lows and I desperately need some help!Here’s my tale:About a year ago, a couple months after an extremely...   TaylorMasonJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Hayley Willacy Peer reviewed by  Dr Toni Hazell Document ID  7204 (v10)  Last updated on   30 November 2022 Next review date  29 November 2027 Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Suicidal ThoughtsHealth informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Dealing With Depression: Mild Depression Self Help     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/mental-health/depression-leaflet/dealing-with-depressionCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


