# Dementia Medications and Treatment: Medicines and Alternative Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Brain and Nerves    Memory Loss and Dementia  Medication and Treatment for Dementia Last updated by Dr Toni Hazell, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP   Last updated 16 May 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Memory Loss and Dementia      Causes of Memory Loss and Dementia      Alzheimer's Disease      Lewy Body Dementia In this series     Memory Loss and Dementia      Causes of Memory Loss and Dementia      Alzheimer's Disease      Lewy Body Dementia The aims of treatment for people with dementia are to slow the worsening of symptoms, maintain function and so promote independence. Medicines for dementia are used to help with symptoms that affect thinking and memory, as well as symptoms that affect mood and behaviour. But there are also many non-drug treatments that can help support a person with dementia.In this article   Dementia medication   Alternative treatment for dementia   How does dementia medication work?   When is medication for dementia usually prescribed?   Which dementia treatment is usually prescribed?   How well do dementia treatments work?   How should dementia medication be taken?   What is the usual length of treatment?   Side-effects of dementia medication   Who cannot take dementia medication?   Can you buy dementia medication? In This Article     Medication and Treatment for DementiaIn this article Dementia medication  Alternative treatment for dementia  How does dementia medication work?  When is medication for dementia usually prescribed?  Which dementia treatment is usually prescribed?  How well do dementia treatments work?  How should dementia medication be taken?  What is the usual length of treatment?  Side-effects of dementia medication  Who cannot take dementia medication?  Can you buy dementia medication? Dementia medicationMedicines for dementia are used firstly as a treatment to help with symptoms that affect thinking and memory (cognitive symptoms). Secondly, they are used as treatment to help with symptoms that affect mood and how someone behaves (non-cognitive symptoms).These medicines do not cure dementia and they may only work for some people. They also may only work for a short time (6-12 months) and generally slow the deterioration rather than preventing it. Medicines for dementia are always started by a doctor who specialises in treating dementia.There are four medicines available in the UK which can be prescribed for dementia. These are donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine and memantine. They are available as tablets, liquids, tablets that dissolve in water, or patches. They come in various brand names.In addition, there are a number of other medicines that may be prescribed to people who have dementia. For example:An antidepressant may be advised if depression is suspected. Depression is common in people with dementia and may be overlooked.Aspirin and other medicines to treat the risk factors for stroke and heart disease may be appropriate for some people. This is especially the case for those with vascular dementia.Sleeping tablets are sometimes needed if difficulty sleeping is a persistent problem.A tranquilliser or an antipsychotic medicine is sometimes prescribed as a last resort for people with dementia who become easily agitated.Research continues looking for new medicines to help with dementia and there is some promising research with drugs known as 'mabs' which are a form of immunotherapy. They target amyloid in the brain, which is part of the disease process that causes dementia, and the hope is that by clearing amyloid plaques more rapidly symptoms may reduce. However, none of these drugs are close to being used in routine clinical care.Alternative treatment for dementiaSupport and care is the most important part of treatmentWhen someone is diagnosed with dementia, a full assessment may be suggested to look at their practical skills, their ability to look after themself, their safety in their home, etc. This usually involves assessment by a number of different healthcare professionals. An individual care plan may be drawn up that outlines the person's specific needs. The aim is to maintain the independence of someone with dementia as much as possible and for as long as possible.Most people with dementia are cared for in the community. Often, the main carer is a family member. It is important that carers get the full support and advice which is locally available. Support and advice may be needed from one or more of the following healthcare and allied professionals, depending on the severity of the dementia and the individual circumstances:District nurses can advise on day-to-day nursing care.Occupational therapists can advise on changes to the physical environment, which may help a person with dementia. For example, handrails and grab bars, labelling of objects, removing items that are not needed in the home.Physiotherapists can help. For example, with exercises to help maintain mobility.Community psychiatric nurses can advise on caring for people with mental illness. Sometimes a specialist assessment by a psychiatrist may be needed.Social Services can advise on local facilities such as daycare centres, benefits, help with care in the home, sitting services, respite care, etc.People who can advise on financial and legal matters, such as Lasting Power of Attorney.Voluntary organisations can be a good source of advice. If you care for a person with dementia, it is well worth getting information about the help that is available in your local area. In most areas of the UK there are organisations that provide support and advice for carers of people with dementia. Your local library or Citizens Advice Bureau will often have contact details.The level of care and support needed often changes over time. For example, some people with mild dementia can cope well in their own home which is very familiar to them. Some may live with a family member who does most of the caring. If things become worse, a place in a residential or nursing home may be best. The situation can be reviewed from time to time to make sure the appropriate levels of care and support are provided.Many carers struggle on beyond the point where they need more help. If you are a carer, you can ask a GP or district nurse to assess a person with dementia if you feel that you need a greater level of support. There are a number of local carer support groups on the internet, which may also be able to provide support and advice. For example, information about respite/short-break services for carers.Other possible treatmentsThere are some other treatments and options that may be helpful for some people with dementia, particularly in certain situations. These include the following:Measures to help simplify the daily routine and enhance memory.Reality orientation.Cognitive stimulation.Regular physical activity.Reminiscence therapy.Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).Behavioural therapy.Animal-assisted therapy.Sensory stimulation.Measures to help simplify the daily routine and enhance memoryThis may be as simple as planning out and writing down a daily routine. This may include writing reminders to do certain things such as putting the rubbish out, locking the door at night-time, etc. Making sure that clothing, keys, glasses or other things that are used often are put in prominent places where they can be found easily may also be helpful. Labelling of commonly used objects may be another useful tool. An occupational therapist may be able to advise.Reality orientationThis is thought to help in some cases. It involves giving regular information to people with dementia about times, places, or people to keep them orientated. It may range from simple things, such as having a board in a prominent place, giving details of the day, date, season, etc, to staff in a residential home reorientating a person with dementia at each contact.Cognitive stimulationStimulating the brain may help to improve memory, language and problem-solving ability. For example, by recreational activities, problem-solving activities and talking to the person with dementia. In addition, recreational activities may enhance quality of life and well-being.Regular physical activityIf possible, such as walking, dancing, etc, may help to slow down the decline in mobility that is common in people with dementia. It may also help if depression is a problem.Reminiscence therapyThis involves encouraging people to talk about the past so that past experiences are brought into their current thoughts. It relies on long-term memory which is often quite good in people with mild-to-moderate dementia.Cognitive behavioural therapyCBT is sometimes tried to help treat depression that is quite common in people with dementia.Behavioural therapyBehavioural therapy may also be used to treat any problems related to behaviour that someone with dementia may have. This type of therapy looks for possible reasons for certain behaviours. For example, someone who wanders a lot may in fact be doing this because they are feeling quite restless. In this situation, taking part in regular physical activity may help.Animal-assisted therapyAnimal-assisted therapy may sometimes be suggested to help people with dementia who have challenging behaviour such as agitation or aggression. For example, allowing the person to spend time with and interact with a trained dog.Sensory stimulationFor example, using music, lights, sounds, smells, massage and aromatherapy to stimulate the brain. This may also be helpful for some people with dementia - for example, to improve their mood or feelings of restlessness.How does dementia medication work?Medicines for dementia work by increasing the levels of certain chemical messengers in the brain.Acetylcholinesterase inhibitorsThese include donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine. They work by increasing the level of acetylcholine. This is a chemical in the brain that is low in people with Alzheimer's disease. These medicines are not a cure for Alzheimer's disease. However, they may help to treat some of the symptoms affecting thinking and memory in about half of people with Alzheimer's disease.In the UK, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends that donepezil, galantamine and rivastigmine can be considered as treatment options for people with mild or moderate Alzheimer's disease, providing that:The medicine is started based on the advice given by a specialist in the care of people with dementia - after this advice, the first prescription might be given by the GP. For those who are already being treated for dementia, NICE says that a GP who feels confident to do this may start memantine without taking advice from a specialist clinician. However, doctors should never work outside of their skills and many GPs may still want to discuss this decision with a specialist.A person receiving treatment has regular reviews and assessments of their condition. (Reviews are usually carried out by a specialist team. Carers' views on the person's condition should also be asked before the medicine is started and should be considered during the reviews.)Common side-effects of these medicines may include feeling sick, muscle cramps, tiredness, headache and diarrhoea. Your doctor should be able to give you more details about possible side-effects.The medicine rivastigmine is also licensed to be used in people with mild-to-moderately severe dementia who also have Parkinson's disease. So, doctors may suggest this medicine for this group of people. Also, an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor medicine may sometimes be suggested for people with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) who have problems with challenging or disruptive behaviour (non-cognitive symptoms). See also the separate leaflet called Lewy Body Dementia.MemantineMemantine is also licensed for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease in some people. It works by reducing the amount of a brain chemical called glutamate. It is thought that this may help to slow down the damage to brain cells affected by Alzheimer's disease. Like the medicines above, this is not a cure. Some research studies have shown that it seems to slow down the progression of the symptoms in some cases.NICE recommends that it can be considered as a treatment option for:People who have moderate Alzheimer's disease and who for some reason cannot take, or are intolerant to, the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor medicines.People who have severe Alzheimer's disease.See also the separate leaflet called Alzheimer's Disease.When is medication for dementia usually prescribed?Your GP will usually refer you to a doctor who specialises in treating dementia, to confirm that you have dementia. The specialist will then decide if you should have treatment and if this should be given in the early stages or later on. The decision making process will also depend on the type of dementia, or whether the person doesn't have dementia but instead has mild cognitive impairment, which is not usually treated with this class of drugs. This decision to start treatment and which treatment to start depends on various things. These include what has caused your dementia, what your symptoms are and how severe your dementia is. Dementia is usually classed as being mild, moderate or severe. See also the separate leaflet called Memory Loss and Dementia.Suffer from migraines?Book an appointment today to see what treatment options are available near you Book now Which dementia treatment is usually prescribed?Your specialist will decide which treatment is right for you. There are national guidelines for people with dementia that can help your specialist decide which treatment to choose.One of the following is usually recommended: donepezil, galantamine and rivastigmine for people with mild or moderate Alzheimer's disease, providing that:The medicine is started by a specialist in the care of people with dementia.A person receiving treatment has regular reviews and assessments of their condition. (Reviews are usually carried out by a specialist team. Carers' views on the person's condition should also be sought before the medicine is started and should be considered during the reviews.)Memantine can be considered as a treatment option for:People who have moderate Alzheimer's disease and who, for some reason, cannot take, or are intolerant to, the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor medicines.People who have severe Alzheimer's disease.These medicines are not usually used for people with other types of dementia. However, rivastigmine can be used for people with Lewy Body dementia/dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB). So, doctors may suggest this medicine for this group of people. Also, an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor medicine may sometimes be suggested for people with DLB who have problems with challenging or disruptive behaviour (non-cognitive symptoms).How well do dementia treatments work?It is thought that about half the people treated with a cholinesterase inhibitor will see an improvement in symptoms which affect thinking and memory. Whether they help with other symptoms such as aggression and agitation has still not been confirmed. The improvement in symptoms is usually only seen for about 6-12 months.For memantine, some studies have shown that it can slow down the progression of symptoms in some cases.How should dementia medication be taken?It is usual to start with a low dose. This is then increased over a period of weeks to a target treatment dose. The dose is increased slowly because when you first start taking these medicines you may develop some unpleasant side-effects - for example, diarrhoea, feeling sick (nausea) and being sick (vomiting).Most people who develop side-effects find that after a period of time these go away. If you are tolerating a low dose well, your doctor will increase your dose, if needed. How often the dose is increased depends upon which medicine you are taking. For example, if you are taking galantamine, the dose is increased every four weeks. If you are taking rivastigmine tablets, the dose is increased at intervals of no less than two weeks.See the leaflet that came with your medicine for more information.What is the usual length of treatment?Medicines for dementia are usually only continued for as long as they are thought to be having a worthwhile effect on symptoms.Side-effects of dementia medicationMedicines for dementia cause side-effects in some people. However, if side-effects do occur, they are usually minor and often go away after a few months.The most common side-effects of anticholinesterase inhibitors include:Diarrhoea.Muscle cramps.Feeling tired (fatigue).Feeling sick (nausea).Being sick (vomiting).Not sleeping well (insomnia).Headache.Being incontinent of urine.Other less common side-effects include:Symptoms of the common cold.Loss of appetite.Mental health disorders.Fainting and seizures.Dizziness.A thumping heart (palpitations).Flushing or sweating.Rash.Itching.Memantine may cause:Dizziness.Headache.Feeling out of breath.Constipation.Drowsiness.High blood pressure.Other less common side-effects include:Vomiting.Blood clots (thrombosis).Heart problems.Confusion.Feeling tired.Seeing things or hearing things which are not real (hallucinations).Problems with walking.The above is not an exhaustive list but highlights the more common possible side-effects. For a full list of side-effects see the information leaflet that comes with the medicine.Who cannot take dementia medication?In general, most people are able to take these medicines. Caution may be needed in people with certain medical problems. For example, people with severe liver or kidney problems may not be able to take them, or they may need a lower dose. Care also needs to be taken in people who have had fits in the past. For those who have Lewy Body dementia, a careful balance needs to be achieved between the memory symptoms and the movement symptoms, as a drug which improves one can worsen the other.Can you buy dementia medication?No - you cannot buy medicines for dementia. They are only available on prescription.How to use the Yellow Card SchemeIf you think you have had a side-effect to one of your medicines you can report this on the Yellow Card Scheme. You can do this online at www.mhra.gov.uk/yellowcard.The Yellow Card Scheme is used to make pharmacists, doctors and nurses aware of any new side-effects that medicines or any other healthcare products may have caused. If you wish to report a side-effect, you will need to provide basic information about:The side-effect.The name of the medicine which you think caused it.The person who had the side-effect.Your contact details as the reporter of the side-effect.It is helpful if you have your medication - and/or the leaflet that came with it - with you while you fill out the report.Previous article   Causes of Memory Loss and Dementia Next article  Alzheimer's Disease  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Dementia, disability and frailty in later life – mid-life approaches to delay or prevent onset; NICE Guidelines (October 2015)Donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine and memantine for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease; NICE Technology appraisal guidance, March 2011 - updated June 2018Dementia Fact Sheet; World Health Organization (WHO), September 2021Robinson L, Tang E, Taylor JP; Dementia: timely diagnosis and early intervention. BMJ. 2015 Jun 16350:h3029. doi: 10.1136/bmj.h3029.Health matters: midlife approaches to reduce dementia risk; Public Health England Guidance, March 2016 - updated 28 June 2021Laver K, Dyer S, Whitehead C, et al; Interventions to delay functional decline in people with dementia: a systematic review of systematic reviews. BMJ Open. 2016 Apr 276(4):e010767. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010767.Brechin D et al; Alternatives to antipsychotic medication: Psychological approaches in managing psychological and behavioural distress in people with dementia, The British Psychological Society, March 2013Living with dementia - Planning ahead; Alzheimer's SocietyDementia: assessment, management and support for people living with dementia and their carers; NICE Guideline (June 2018)Dementia; NICE Quality standard, June 2019Dementia; NICE CKS, December 2022 (UK access only)Related InformationMemory Loss and DementiaCauses of Memory Loss and DementiaAlzheimer's DiseaseLewy Body DementiaDementia Pro  The best brain exercises to sharpen your mind    5 minutes reading time  21-Feb-24  Young-onset dementia is linked to health and lifestyle, as well as genetics     10 minutes reading time  12-Feb-24  Blood test could predict Alzheimer's 20 years before symptoms     3 minutes reading time  02-Aug-19  5 benefits of reading    7 minutes reading time  25-Jan-24  I wake up in the morning with memory troubles. How can I prevent this?   ShahidullJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Toni Hazell, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP Document ID  13892 (v4)  Last updated on   16 May 2023 Next review date  14 April 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Causes of Memory Loss and DementiaNext article Alzheimer's Disease Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Dementia Medications and Treatment: Medicines and Alternative Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/brain-nerves/memory-loss-and-dementia/medication-and-treatment-for-dementiaCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up

