# Diabetic Amyotrophy | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Diabetes    Diabetes  Diabetic Amyotrophy Last updated by Dr Laurence Knott, MBBS   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP   Last updated 30 Apr 2020   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Diabetes      Diabetes and High Blood Pressure      Diabetes Foot Care      Diabetic Kidney Disease      Diabetic Neuropathy      Blood Sugar Tests In this series     Diabetes      Diabetes and High Blood Pressure      Diabetes Foot Care      Diabetic Kidney Disease      Diabetic Neuropathy      Blood Sugar Tests Diabetic amyotrophy is a nerve disorder complication of diabetes mellitus. It affects the thighs, hips, buttocks and legs, causing pain and muscle wasting.In this article   What is diabetic amyotrophy?   What is diabetic amyotrophy like?   What causes diabetic amyotrophy?   How common is diabetic amyotrophy?   How is diabetic amyotrophy diagnosed?   How is diabetic amyotrophy treated?   What is the outlook for patients with diabetic amyotrophy?   How do I prevent diabetic amyotrophy? In This Article     Diabetic AmyotrophyIn this article What is diabetic amyotrophy?  What is diabetic amyotrophy like?  What causes diabetic amyotrophy?  How common is diabetic amyotrophy?  How is diabetic amyotrophy diagnosed?  How is diabetic amyotrophy treated?  What is the outlook for patients with diabetic amyotrophy?  How do I prevent diabetic amyotrophy? What is diabetic amyotrophy?Diabetic amyotrophy is a nerve disorder which is a complication of diabetes mellitus. It affects the thighs, hips, buttocks and legs, causing pain and muscle wasting. It is also called by several other names, including proximal diabetic neuropathy, lumbosacral radiculoplexus neurophagy and femoral neurophagy.What is diabetic amyotrophy like?The main features of diabetic amyotrophy are:Weakness of the lower legs, buttocks or hip.Muscle wasting, usually in the front of the thigh, which follows within weeks.Pain, sometimes severe, usually in the front of the thigh but sometimes in the hip, buttock or back.Other features which occur in some (but not all) patients are:Altered sensation and tingling in the thigh, hip or buttock, which tends to be mild in comparison to the pain and weakness.About half of patients also have distal neuropathy, meaning that sensation in the nerves of the lower legs and feet may be separately affected by this condition (which is the most common form of diabetic neuropathy). See the separate leaflet called Diabetic Neuropathy.About half of people affected lose weight.Symptoms generally begin on one side and then spread to the other in a stepwise progression. The condition may come on quickly or more slowly and usually remains asymmetrical (ie the two sides of the body are unequally affected) throughout its course. About half of patients also have distal symmetrical polyneuropathy, which means the sensation in their feet and toes on both sides is also affected.The condition tends to go on for several months but can last up to three years. By the end of this time it usually recovers, although not always completely. During its course it may be severe enough to necessitate wheelchair use.Pain subsides well before the muscular strength improves. This may take months and mild-to-moderate weakness may continue indefinitely. Some patients also develop associated pain or weakness in the arms, chest and upper back.What causes diabetic amyotrophy?Diabetic amyotrophy is thought to be caused by an abnormality of the immune system, which damages the tiny blood vessels which supply the nerves to the legs. This process is called microvasculitis. The likelihood of getting it does not seem to be related to how long you have diabetes, or how severely you are affected. However, it occurs only very rarely if you don't have diabetes. It is therefore thought that although having raised blood sugar does not directly damage the nerves, it may contribute in some way to the process of damage.How common is diabetic amyotrophy?The condition affects around 1 in 100 people with type 2 diabetes and around 3 in 1,000 people with type 1 diabetes. This is uncommon by comparison to peripheral neuropathy, which 50% of people with diabetes experience to some degree.You are more likely to develop diabetic amyotrophy if you are over 50, although younger patients can be affected. The condition can itself be the first sign that you have diabetes.How is diabetic amyotrophy diagnosed?If your doctor suspects that you have this condition, it is likely that they will refer you to a neurologist or diabetes specialist for further tests.The doctor will examine you, looking for muscle weakness and wasting and for changes in your leg reflexes. He or she will check the sensation in your legs. If you also have peripheral neuropathy then this may be markedly reduced, although in pure diabetic amyotrophy it is often unchanged.They will ask you to have some blood tests to check for vitamin deficiencies; also, your diabetic control will be reviewed. Other possible tests include:Lumbar puncture to look for signs of inflammation in the fluid around the spinal cord.Nerve conduction studies to check the workings of the nerves to your legs.An MRI scan of your lower back may be done to rule out compression of the nerves around the spineHow is diabetic amyotrophy treated?Treatment mainly consists of maintaining the best possible control of your diabetes, together with a very active programme of physiotherapy. It is very important to keep muscles working as much as possible, to minimise wasting and improve the speed and degree of recovery.Improving lifestyle habits, such as maintaining a good diet and avoiding smoking, is likely to be helpful.Medications are prescribed by doctors for the pain of diabetic amyotrophy. This type of pain, which is referred to as neuropathic pain or nerve pain, often responds less well to conventional painkillers like paracetamol. Doctors often prescribe specialist nerve pain treatments, including amitriptyline, antidepressants and antiepileptic medicines.Steroid medicines and immunosuppressant medicines have recently been used to help speed recovery. However, as yet there is not enough evidence to be certain that this treatment is always effective.How long the treatment is prescribed for depends on the course of the condition and the amount of nerve damage.What is the outlook for patients with diabetic amyotrophy?The outlook (prognosis) is usually good. Most patients recover well, although some symptoms may remain. The chances of making a good recovery - and remaining well (as the condition can relapse) - are improved by maintaining good diabetes control.How do I prevent diabetic amyotrophy?The best way to reduce your risk of developing this condition, as for many of the complications of diabetes, is to:Avoid smoking.Eat well but sensibly.Maintain a healthy body weight.Most importantly, retain as tight a control of your diabetes as is possible.Attend regular check-ups to ensure the condition doesn't worsenDiabetic amyotrophy can still occur. However, it is likely that recovery will be faster and easier if these elements are already in control.Dr Mary Lowth is an author or the original author of this leaflet.Previous article   Diabetic Neuropathy Next article  Blood Sugar Tests  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Management of diabetes; Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network - SIGN (March 2010 - updated November 2017)Diabetes (type 1 and type 2) in children and young people: diagnosis and management; NICE Guidelines (Aug 2015 - updated May 2023)Diabetic foot problems: prevention and management; NICE Guidelines (August 2015 - last updated October 2019)Type 2 diabetes in adults: management; NICE Guidance (December 2015 - last updated June 2022)Type 1 diabetes in adults: diagnosis and management; NICE Guidelines (August 2015 - last updated August 2022)Diabetes UKChan YC, Lo YL, Chan ES; Immunotherapy for diabetic amyotrophy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Jul 267:CD006521. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006521.pub4.Gylfadottir SS, Weeracharoenkul D, Andersen ST, et al; Painful and non-painful diabetic polyneuropathy: Clinical characteristics and diagnostic issues. J Diabetes Investig. 2019 Sep10(5):1148-1157. doi: 10.1111/jdi.13105. Epub 2019 Jul 29.Related InformationDiabetic Amyotrophy ProDiabetic Neuropathy ProDiabetic Foot ProNeuropathic Joints (Charcot Joints) ProInsulin Regimens Pro  How to eat out with diabetes    4 minutes reading time  24-Jan-24  Can you claim disability benefits if you have diabetes?    5 minutes reading time  21-Sep-23  Does diabetes increase your risk of coronavirus?    6 minutes reading time  28-May-20  Is having diabetes a disability?    5 minutes reading time  28-Sep-17  My sugar is high in a morning. Is there any advice.I'd appreciate your feed back.   jeannie37469Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Laurence Knott, MBBS Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP Document ID  29219 (v2)  Last updated on   30 April 2020 Next review date  29 April 2025 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Diabetic NeuropathyNext article Blood Sugar Tests Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Diabetic Amyotrophy     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/diabetes/diabetes-mellitus-leaflet/diabetic-amyotrophyCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


