# Diet and diabetes: how to manage type 2 diabetes through your diet | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Type 2 Diabetes    Features  Added to  Saved itemsDiabetes diet: managing type 2 diabetes        Save       Remove from Saved       Print      Share      FeedbackIf you have type 2 diabetes it is often difficult to know which foods you should or shouldn't eat. Here we explain the key elements to a diabetes diet to help you prevent or delay associated health problems, and address some common myths around eating with type 2 diabetes. Last updated by Sarika Mongia, RD   Peer reviewed by Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGP  Last updated 21 Feb 2024   Originally published 21 Apr 2021 7 mins readResearch has evolved so much in the past decade and so has the dietary advice. So what should you eat to manage your type 2 diabetes?Is there a special diet for type 2 diabetes?In short, the answer is no, there's no specific or special diet that people with type 2 diabetes need to follow other than eating regular healthy and balanced meals. This means eating foods in the right amounts from all the main food groups.Fruits and vegetablesFruit and veg can be enjoyed fresh, frozen or tined in natural juices. Try to include different colours and varieties. Fruits and vegetables are full of vitamins, naturally high in fibre, low in fat and great for helping weight loss. As fruits are higher in natural sugars, it is best to eat them with something that is high in good fats like Greek yoghurt to slow the surge in sugar in your blood stream. It is also best to eat more vegetables than fruit because of this higher sugar content.Eating at least five portions per day - aiming for 3 veg and 2 fruit options, can help to reduce the risk of heart disease and certain cancers. And, importantly, they taste delicious -try putting more fruit and veg into your meals or having them as a healthy snack in between?Starchy foodsStarchy foods include potatoes, bread, rice, pasta and other grains.Starchy foods are broken down into simple sugars in the body. They tend to be the body's main fuel source. On average, we get around half of our total daily calories from this group.Some people with type 2 diabetes prefer to follow a low-carbohydrate diet - between 50 g-130 g a day to help control spikes in their blood sugar or help with weight loss. You can be supported by your healthcare professional if this is something you're interested in trying.Some people have even managed to put their type 2 diabetes into remission - in other words, their blood sugar is in the normal range without using medication - part of which is with a low-carb diet.Importantly, not all starchy foods are broken down in the body the same way. Some foods - particularly 'refined' carbohydrates - are broken down very quickly, resulting in sharp increases in blood sugar. This is not ideal if you have type 2 diabetes, as it can leave you feeling unwell or sluggish in the short term and lead to complications in the long term if blood sugars are consistently high.Because of this, we recommend wholegrain carbohydrates like seeded bread, whole oats and brown rice, ideally combining them with some protein. This helps to avoid sharp increases in blood sugar.The glycaemic index (GI) is a ranking system that determines how slowly a food is broken down in the body. Foods with lower GI numbers release more slowly into the bloodstream. Any changes to your carbohydrate intake should be used in combination with healthy eating.Protein foodsProtein foods include lean meats, eggs, fish, beans and pulses.Protein requirements are the same whether you have diabetes or not. However, if you have type 2 diabetes, you're at higher risk of heart disease. It's therefore advisable to choose lean proteins and prepare in a way that avoids using lots of fat, like grilling or roasting.Aim to include 1-2 portions of oily fish in your diet each week. Oily fish, including salmon, fresh tuna, sardines, herrings and pilchards, have been shown to be protective of your heart.Plant-based sources of protein such as beans and pulses - like chickpeas, kidney beans, lentils, black-eyed beans - are full of a type of fibre that helps to lower blood sugars and cholesterol: this means they can play an important role in helping to manage diabetes.Dairy and alternativesFor example, milk, yoghurts and cheese.This group is the main source of calcium and should be included in your daily diet. It is advisable to opt for full-fat options as they are less processed, or reduce portion sizes. Natural Greek yoghurt sweetened with fruit is an ideal snack or dessert choice.Fats and oilsFor example, cooking oils, margarines and butters.Our bodies need fat, but it needs to be the right type of fat and in small quantities. We rely on our diet for fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E and K and essential fatty acids.We should all try to minimise our fat intake but when you do eat fatty foods, swap saturated fat for unsaturated where possible.Choose healthier fats such as olive, rapeseed and sunflower-based oils which are cardioprotective as opposed to ones high in saturated fats such as lard, ghee, butter, coconut and palm oil.Salt and alcoholIt's also important to reduce your intake of salt - opt for lower-salt alternatives where possible and consider using spices and herbs to flavour your food naturally.Keeping an eye on your alcohol intake is important to maintain a healthy lifestyle. Adults are advised not to drink more than 14 units of alcohol each week. You should spread your intake across several days with alcohol-free days in between. If you're pregnant, you should avoid drinking any alcohol. Our picks for Diabetes diet: managing type 2 diabetes How I reversed my type 2 diabetes - Matt's story Getting diagnosed with type 2 diabetes can feel scary and frustrating, but it doesn't have to be...   7min  How I reversed my type 2 diabetes - Matt's story    7min  How to eat well and enjoy Christmas food when you have type 2 diabetes   8min Sponsored  Why type 2 diabetes check-ups are so important   7minDo I need to lose weight?Carrying extra weight plays an important role in the development of type 2 diabetes.If you are overweight and have type 2 diabetes, losing even as little as 5-10% of your body weight and maintaining that weight loss level can help to manage your diabetes better and reduce your risk of long-term complications.Research by Diabetes UK shows losing up to 15 kg can put your diabetes into remission1.Common type 2 diabetes diet mythsDo I have to choose special diabetic diet foods?No. There is no evidence to suggest such foods offer any benefit over regular healthy eating.Am I allowed to eat sweet fruits like bananas, grapes or mango?Absolutely! All fruits are allowed. While fruits do contain natural sugars, these are processed differently in the body to refined sugars. Grapes are very high in sugar, whilst you can still eat them, portions should be smaller.It's best to avoid extremely high intakes, but fruits can be a great snack especially if they are replacing high-fat and sugary foods like cakes and biscuits.Fruit juices, fruit smoothies and dried fruit have higher sugar concentrations and if consumed, should be in moderation.Can I have red meat?There has been a fair amount of research on red meats - and in particular processed type meats (sausages, bacon, burgers, hot dogs) - that has shown increased consumption can increase the risk of certain cancers2.Although there is no official guidance on how many servings of red meat a week are appropriate, we know that lean red meat is a good source of protein, iron, zinc and B12. On balance, the take-home message is to eat red meat sensibly, meaning not to eat too much or too often. Diabetes UK recommends eating no more than 70 g of red meat a day - around 5 tablespoons of cooked mince or a small burger.Do I have to give up sugar forever?You do not need to cut out all sugar but it is advisable to cut down on refined sugars, foods with added sugars, and highly sweetened foods like soft drinks, chocolate, cakes and biscuits, especially if your current intake is high. With or without diabetes, we should all be eating less refined sugars which can contribute to weight gain and obesity, heart disease and dental issues.Further readingDiabetes UK: Can you reverse type 2 diabetes?Cancer Research UK: Does eating processed and red meat cause cancer? Read nextHow I reversed my type 2 diabetes - Matt's story How to eat well and enjoy Christmas food when you have type 2 diabetesAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Related InformationManaging type 2 diabetes with exerciseType 2 Diabetes TreatmentType 2 Diabetes DietThe best sports to try if you have type 2 diabetes Changing your dietary habits after a type 2 diabetes diagnosis   How I reversed my type 2 diabetes - Matt's story     7 minutes reading time  14-Nov-23  How to eat well and enjoy Christmas food when you have type 2 diabetes    8 minutes reading time  13-Nov-23 Sponsored  Why type 2 diabetes check-ups are so important    7 minutes reading time  18-Nov-21  My sugar is high in a morning. Is there any advice.I'd appreciate your feed back.   jeannie37469Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Read next How I reversed my type 2 diabetes - Matt's story  Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Diet and diabetes: how to manage type 2 diabetes through your diet     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/news-and-features/diet-and-diabetes-how-to-manage-type-2-diabetes-through-your-diet?iitt=bdivRdssOuYJ4FQ.bux7tI_8huoA4Fz8hGl7xIo8tIxp4kHjhIndxIoJhnTTCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


