# Discoid Eczema: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Skincare and Conditions    Atopic Eczema  Discoid Eczema Last updated by Dr Pippa Vincent   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 16 Apr 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Atopic Eczema      Eczema Triggers and Irritants      Emollients and Eczema Creams      Topical Steroids for Eczema      Pompholyx      Eczema Herpeticum In this series     Atopic Eczema      Eczema Triggers and Irritants      Emollients and Eczema Creams      Topical Steroids for Eczema      Pompholyx      Eczema Herpeticum Eczema (dermatitis) is a term used to describe conditions where there is inflammation of skin. There are several types of eczema. Discoid eczema is one type which causes round or oval red patches of inflamed skin. The cause is uncertain. Treatment includes regular use of emollients to moisturise your skin, steroid creams to reduce inflammation and treatment of any infection of the affected skin.In this article   What is discoid eczema?   Discoid eczema symptoms   Discoid eczema image   Discoid eczema causes   How common is discoid eczema?   Discoid eczema diagnosis   Discoid eczema treatment   Discoid eczema complications   Outlook for discoid eczema In This Article     Discoid EczemaIn this article What is discoid eczema?  Discoid eczema symptoms  Discoid eczema image  Discoid eczema causes  How common is discoid eczema?  Discoid eczema diagnosis  Discoid eczema treatment  Discoid eczema complications  Outlook for discoid eczema What is discoid eczema?Discoid eczema is a type of eczema that causes round- or oval-shaped red patches on the skin. Eczema is also called dermatitis. Dermatitis is a general term which means inflammation of the skin. Discoid refers to the disc shape of the eczema patches. Discoid eczema is sometimes called nummular eczema. Nummular literally means coin-shaped, another way of describing the shape of the patches of eczema.Discoid eczema symptomsThe most common symptom of discoid eczema is a patch of coin-shaped eczematous lesions on the body. These are:Pinky-red, dry and scaly patches of skin.Itchy patches of skin that are often worse at night.Skin patches that burn or sting.The skin between the discoid eczema patches looks normal except that, in general, many people with discoid eczema have dry skin.Discoid eczema often starts on the legs. Some people will only have one or two patches of discoid eczema but others may develop many patches. Discoid eczema can occur anywhere on the body but it is relatively common for it to only be on the legs. It is uncommon on the face and scalp. It tends to become worse in the winter months in cold, dry climates. Sun tends to improve the symptoms in most people. Because of this discoid eczema can sometimes be mistaken for psoriasis.Sometimes the skin patches can clear in the centre, just leaving a ring of eczema . If this happens, discoid eczema can sometimes be mistaken for ringworm. It is possible for patches of discoid eczema to become infected with germs (bacteria). Signs of infection include:Increased redness.Weeping or blistering of the skin patch.Discoid eczema imageDiscoid eczema (also called nummular eczema)Mohammad2018, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia CommonsBy Mohammad2018, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia CommonsDiscoid eczema causesThe exact cause of discoid eczema is uncertain. However, most people with discoid eczema have generally dry skin. One theory is that the dry skin upsets the normal fatty layer within the outer layer of the skin (the epidermis) which usually helps to protect the skin. Because this protection is lost, special proteins that can cause allergy (allergens) can penetrate through the skin. This can lead to an allergic or irritant response in the skin, so leading to the patches of eczema. In fact, some doctors consider discoid eczema as a form of adult-onset atopic (allergic) dermatitis.Sometimes certain medicines can trigger discoid eczema in some people. For example, medicines used to treat hepatitis C infection (called interferon and ribavirin). Insect bites or a minor skin injury can also trigger an outbreak of discoid eczema in some people.Because the fatty, protective layer within the skin is lost, it is thought that some people with discoid eczema may also have an increased risk of developing contact dermatitis. Contact dermatitis is eczema that is caused by your skin reacting to a substance it has come into contact with. Such substances can include nickel in jewellery or belt buckles, cosmetics, preservatives in creams and ointments, additives to leather, etc. See the separate leaflet called Contact Dermatitis for more details.How common is discoid eczema?Suffer from dermatitis?Book a private appointment with a local pharmacist today to discover treatment options Book now Discoid eczema is quite common and probably affects about 2 in 1,000 people. It seems to be more common in men than in women. Discoid eczema can affect men and women of any age but it most commonly affects people aged between 50 and 65 and women between the ages of 15 and 25. It is rare in children.Discoid eczema diagnosisIt is diagnosed by the typical skin appearance. If a doctor is uncertain about the diagnosis then they may need to exclude a fungal skin infection. For example, if there has been clearing of the skin rash in the centre (as described above), they may suggest scraping a few skin cells off a skin patch which can then be sent off to the laboratory to look for a fungal infection.If your doctor feels that this may have contact dermatitis, they may suggest skin patch testing. In this procedure, tiny amounts of up to 25 or more substances are applied as small patches to the skin, usually on your upper back. They are fixed on with non-allergic tape. Some days later, the patches are removed by a dermatology specialist and the skin is examined to see if there is a reaction to any of the tested substances. See the separate leaflet called Patch Testing for Contact Dermatitis for more details.Discoid eczema treatmentTreatment is aimed at:Restoring fluid to your skin (called rehydration).Treating the skin inflammation.Also treating any infection that may be present.Medicines are available to help relieve the symptoms and keep the condition under control.Treatments include:Skin rehydration treatmentThis is done by using emollients. Emollients are often called moisturisers. They are lotions, creams, ointments and bath/shower additives that are applied to the skin to stop it becoming dry. Emollients should be used as soap substitutes when washing as regular soap tends to dry out the skin. After bathing/showering, emollients should be applied to the skin.Regular use of emollients is the most important part of the day-to-day treatment for people with eczema, including discoid eczema. Emollients prevent skin from becoming dry and help to protect the skin from irritants. They should be used on all skin and not just the areas affected by discoid eczema. It is particularly important to carry on with daily moisturising of the skin even after a flare-up of discoid eczema has healed. This is to help reduce the chance of a further flare-up.There are many types and brands of emollients, ranging from runny lotions to thick ointments. The difference between lotions, creams and ointments is the proportion of oil (lipid) to water. The lipid content is lowest in lotions, intermediate in creams and highest in ointments. The higher the lipid content, the greasier and stickier it feels and the shinier it looks on the skin. As a general rule, the higher the lipid content (the more greasy and thick the emollient), the better and longer it works but the messier it is to use. See the separate leaflet called Emollients and Eczema Creams for more details.The use of petroleum jelly is sometimes recommended to keep the skin hydrated.Topical steroids to reduce inflammationA topical steroid is a steroid cream or ointment that is applied to the skin. In discoid eczema, topical steroids are applied to the skin patches to reduce inflammation. Ointments tend to be better than creams because they tend to hold water in the skin better and form a better protective barrier for the skin.Steroid cream or ointment should not be used on normal skin and should only be used when there is a flare-up of the discoid eczema. This is because long-term steroid cream use can have some negative effects on skin, including thinning of your skin. See the separate leaflet called Topical Steroids for Eczema for more details.Sometimes wet wrap treatments are used with a topical steroid to treat discoid eczema. The skin is made wet first with lukewarm water so that it is well hydrated. Then, a steroid ointment is applied to the affected areas of skin. Next, damp pyjamas or bandaging are used to seal in the steroid ointment for around one hour. These treatments would normally be recommended by a dermatologist if needed.Very rarely, in severe cases, steroid tablets taken by mouth or given by injection may be needed to treat discoid eczema.Note: when using both an emollient and a topical steroid, the emollient should be applied first. After applying an emollient, 10-15 minutes should be left before applying a topical steroid. That is, the emollient should be allowed to absorb before a steroid is applied. (The skin should be moist or slightly tacky but not slippery, when applying the steroid.)Treatment of infectionAntibiotic medication might be needed if there is bacterial infection of discoid eczema patches. This may be in a cream or tablet form depending on the severity of the infection.Treatment to reduce itchingAntihistamine tablets may help to reduce itching and may be particularly useful at night when trying to sleep. However, some antihistamines can cause drowsiness (even the next day), needing caution with driving or operating machinery.Other treatmentsTar preparations may be helpful, especially in areas of skin that have been thickened and scaly for a long time.Tacrolimus and pimecrolimus are other creams that may be used to help reduce inflammation in some people with discoid eczema. They may be considered in some people if steroid treatment is not working.Because discoid eczema tends to improve in the sun, ultraviolet (UV) light treatment (phototherapy) can sometimes be helpful as a treatment. The UV radiation helps to reduce the inflammation in the skin. However, care should be taken, as exposure to UV radiation does carry its own risks of skin damage. This includes an increased risk of skin cancers. So, the risks of this type of treatment need to be weighed against the benefits. This type of treatment is usually used if discoid eczema is severe or other treatments have not worked.Medicines that suppress the immune system may occasionally be needed to treat discoid eczema. They include medicines such as ciclosporin. Again, they are usually only used in severe cases of discoid eczema that are very difficult to treat and have not responded to other treatments.Discoid eczema complicationsAs mentioned above, bacterial infection of a patch of discoid eczema can occur and needs to be treated with antibiotics. Also, care should be taken to avoid scratching the itchy patches where possible as scarring can sometimes occur.After a discoid eczema skin patch has healed, in many people there will be no residual signs. However, in some people there can be some permanent brown discolouration of the skin in the affected area. In others, the affected area of skin can become paler than the surrounding skin.Outlook for discoid eczemaOnce discoid eczema has been successfully treated, a flare-up can occur again in the future. Therefore, it is important to keep the skin well hydrated with emollients to reduce the chance of future flare-ups.Where possible, it is best to try to avoid anything that may have triggered the eczema, such as hot baths or irritating clothing. A humidifier in the room may help to reduce flare-ups. If flare-ups do occur, they often affect the same areas of skin as before.Previous article   Topical Steroids for Eczema Next article  Pompholyx  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Fleming C, Parry E, Forsyth A, et al; Patch testing in discoid eczema. Contact Dermatitis. 1997 May36(5):261-4.Leung AKC, Lam JM, Leong KF, et al; Nummular Eczema: An Updated Review. Recent Pat Inflamm Allergy Drug Discov. 202014(2):146-155. doi: 10.2174/1872213X14666200810152246.Related InformationAtopic EczemaEmollients and Eczema CreamsAtopic Dermatitis and Eczema ProContact and Occupational Dermatitis ProContact Dermatitis  Which natural remedies help soothe eczema?    5 minutes reading time  23-Feb-24  Why eczema itches - and how to stop it    5 minutes reading time  10-Jan-24  How the seasons affect your eczema    5 minutes reading time  09-Mar-18 Sponsored  How can technology help us manage health conditions?    5 minutes reading time  05-Oct-20  Has anyone found** 80% cotton 20% polyester** to be goo material for atopic eczema sufferers? My order for clothes was supposed to be 100% cotton but the description doesn't state there was polyester...   David0032Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Pippa Vincent Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  13159 (v6)  Last updated on   16 April 2023 Next review date  14 April 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Topical Steroids for EczemaNext article Pompholyx Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Discoid Eczema: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/skin-conditions/atopic-eczema/discoid-eczemaCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


