# Dry Eyes (Dry Eye Syndrome): Causes and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Eye Care    Eye Problems  Dry Eyes Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy   Peer reviewed by Dr Doug McKechnie  Last updated 24 Feb 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Eye Problems      Infective Conjunctivitis      Allergic Conjunctivitis      Episcleritis and Scleritis      Uveitis      Subconjunctival Haemorrhage In this series     Eye Problems      Infective Conjunctivitis      Allergic Conjunctivitis      Episcleritis and Scleritis      Uveitis      Subconjunctival Haemorrhage Dry eye syndrome is a common cause of eye irritation. Although it most commonly affects older people, anyone can experience dry eyes. Artificial tears, gels and soothing ointments usually ease symptoms.In this article   What is dry eye syndrome?   Who develops dry eye syndrome?   What causes dry eyes?   Dry eyes symptoms   Are dry eyes dangerous?   How are dry eyes diagnosed?   How to treat dry eyes   Contact lens wearers In This Article     Dry EyesIn this article What is dry eye syndrome?  Who develops dry eye syndrome?  What causes dry eyes?  Dry eyes symptoms  Are dry eyes dangerous?  How are dry eyes diagnosed?  How to treat dry eyes  Contact lens wearers What is dry eye syndrome?Dry eye syndrome (also known as keratoconjunctivitis sicca, or simply 'dry eyes') occurs when there is a change in the tear film that normally keeps the eye moist and lubricated. It can occur as a result of various conditions.What is the tear film?Your tear film has three layers - the main middle watery layer, the thin outer oily layer, and the thin inner mucus layer. The main middle watery layer is what we usually think of as tears.Each eye has a lacrimal gland just above, and to the outer side, tucked right up underneath the eyelid. These glands make the watery part of the tear film, and release it on to the front of the eye. When you blink, your eyelid spreads the fluid over the front of the eye.Eye with eyelid detailEye and tear productionYour eyelids contain multiple tiny glands, called Meibomian glands. These make the oily liquid which covers the outer layer of the tear film. Only a tiny amount is needed; however, this oily layer helps to keep the tear surface smooth and to slow down the evaporation and drying of the watery tears.Finally, the clear coating that covers the front of your eye and the underside of your eyelids, the conjunctiva, makes a small amount of mucus-like fluid which is the third layer of your tear film. This mucus allows the watery tears to spread evenly over the surface of the eye.The tear fluid is produced constantly. It drains away from your eye down small channels (canaliculi) on the inner side of your eye, and into a tear sac. From here it flows down a channel called the tear ducts (also called the nasolacrimal duct) into the nose. You can see the entrance to the nasolacrimal duct in the inner corner of your eye, just inside the lower lid. Our picks for Dry Eyes Blue light filters: do they really work?Most of us spend several hours looking at digital screens every day, all of which emit varying l...   4min  Blue light filters: do they really work?   4min  How to reduce eye strain while watching TV   7min  How to look after your eyes while working from home   8min  Anatomy of the eyeWho develops dry eye syndrome?Dry eye syndrome can affect anyone, but it becomes more common with increasing age. Dry eyes affect as many as a third of older people, and about 1 in 10 younger people. Women are affected more often than men.What causes dry eyes?The causes include:AgeingPeople tend to make fewer tears as they become older. Women often first notice dry eyes developing after the menopause.MedicationSome medicines can have a side-effect of causing our eyes to feel dry. These include:'Water' tablets (diuretics).Some antidepressants.Antihistamines, often used for hay fever and allergy.Some treatments for anxiety and other psychological problems.Beta-blockers such as propranolol, atenolol.Some treatments for acne, etc.Some eye drops used to treat other eye conditions.Some cough medicines.Tell your doctor if you suspect that a medicine is causing your dry eyes.Medical conditionsSome people with dry eyes develop the condition as a symptom of another medical condition. Dry eyes are particularly associated with rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and Sjögren's syndrome. In each of these conditions you would normally have other symptoms, such as joint pains or skin rashes.Increased evaporation of tearsYour environment has a huge effect on your eyes. Dry warm air, solar radiation and wind all increase evaporation and tend to dry the eyes. The most common environmental causes of dry eye are:Low humidity - for example, from central heating or air conditioning, or living in a hot dry climate.Having a low blinking rate, often combined with opening your eyes wider than normal, increases evaporation of tears and stops you spreading new tears as effectively. Some people blink less than others. You will blink less if you spend long periods concentrating on computer screens, TV or microscope. People with Parkinson's disease often blink less than normal.Wearing contact lensesWearing contact lenses can cause dry eyes as it limits oxygen flow into the eye that is essential in developing natural tears.Windy conditionsThe air moving across the eye more quickly can cause tears to evaporate more quickly causing dryness.Not covering the eyes completely when closing the eyelidsFor example, due to eye problems related to thyroid disease. Some elderly people have a condition called ectropion, when the eyelids tend to turn outwards and this can expose part of the eye during sleep. Some people sleep with their eyes partly open.Damage to the outer part of the eyes, eyelids, etc, from disease, injury or surgeryThis can affect our natural ability to produce enough tears and result in damage to the general functioning of the eye.Skin rashes such as seborrhoeic dermatitis or rosaceaSeborrhoeic dermatitis and ocular rosacea can cause or exacerbate Meibomian gland dysfunction, and can lead to worsened symptoms of dry eye disease.Inflammation of the eyelids (blepharitis)Blepharitis is often associated with dry eyes.UnknownSome younger people have no apparent cause. They simply produce less than the normal amount of tears.Dry eyes symptomsBoth eyes are usually affected. Symptoms include:Irritation in the eyes. The eyes may feel gritty or burning. However, the eyes do not go red. If they do, another eye problem or a complication is usually present.Very slight temporary blurring of vision from time to time. However, dry eyes do not affect the seeing part of the eye, and dry eyes do not usually cause permanent damage to vision.Discomfort in your eyes when looking at bright lights.If you wear contact lenses, you may find they become uncomfortable.The eye usually feels dry - but it doesn't always feel dry.Are dry eyes dangerous?Complications are uncommon. They are more likely if you have an underlying medical condition AND are exposed to a dry environment, so that the eyes become extremely dry.Inflammation of the conjunctiva (conjunctivitis) or the cornea at the front of the eye (keratitis) can occur. If this becomes severe, small ulcers may develop on the cornea. Very rarely, the cornea can puncture (perforate).You should see a doctor or optician if your eye becomes red or if your vision is affected by dry eyes. you should also seek medical advice if you know you have dry eyes but eye pain develops which seems more than the usual grittiness or irritation. Pain and altered vision are not normally symptoms of dry eyes and may indicate another eye condition or a complication of dry eyes.How are dry eyes diagnosed?A doctor or optician can usually diagnose dry eyes from the symptoms, and from examining your eye. However, as dry eyes can be a symptom of an underlying disease (such as Sjögren's syndrome), don't be surprised if your doctor asks about all sorts of other symptoms.Sometimes a test is done to confirm the diagnosis of dry eyes. This is called Schirmer's Tear Test, and it measures the quantity of tears that you form. Special paper is placed under the lower lid of your eye and left for five minutes. Your tear production can be assessed by how wet the filter paper becomes after five minutes. Further examination with an instrument called a slit lamp - usually by an optician or a specialist eye doctor (ophthalmologist) - is sometimes needed. This can show up dry patches or ulcers on the surface of the eye. If your dry eyes are associated with another disease, your doctor may refer you to an ophthalmologist for advice and treatment.How to treat dry eyesMost treatments for dry eyes are aimed at moisturising and re-lubricating the eye. A few treatments are aimed at altering your tear production. You can also help yourself by:Trying to keep your environment less dry. This might mean turning your heating down, or using a humidifier.Wearing glasses or sunglasses can help in protecting your eyes from wind and dust when out in a hot, dry environment.Resting your eyes by taking regular breaks if you spent long periods in front of a screen or staring down a microscope.Keeping your eyelids healthy: your eyelids produce the oily part of your tear film and if they become swollen or inflamed they may do this less well. If you wear eye make-up use gentle removers and don't scrub at your eyelids. Change your mascara regularly and, if your eyelids become puffy or sore, consider a change of brand.Artificial tearsThese come as eye drops and gels, and are usually good at relieving symptoms. You can buy them over the counter at pharmacies. At first, you may need to use them every hour or more to improve symptoms. Once symptoms improve, you may then only need to use them three or four times a day. You may need to use them regularly to keep symptoms away.There are several types of artificial tear drops and gels, with different ingredients. Occasionally, some people find one type may irritate. A change to a different, preservative-free preparation may help if the first does not suit. Ask your pharmacist or optician for advice.Some artificial tears contain preservatives such as benzalkonium hexachloride. Using these for long periods can damage the front of the eye (the cornea). If you use artificial tears more than four times per day long-term, you should use a preservative-free brand.Eye ointmentIt may also help to use a soothing and lubricating ointment at bedtime for overnight. You can buy this too at pharmacies. You should not use ointment during the day as it can make the artificial tear drops less effective and can make your vision blurry.Do not use eye ointment if you use other eye drops for other conditions such as raised pressure in the eye (glaucoma).Other treatmentsArtificial tears and soothing ointments work well in most cases. Other treatments may be advised by a specialist in severe cases not helped by the above.Examples of other treatment options sometimes used for severe cases include:Anti-inflammatory eye drops or tablets (for example, steroid eye drops or tetracycline tablets).Medicines to boost tear production by the tear gland (for example pilocarpine).Surgery to stop the tears from draining away.Temporary plugs inserted in your lacrimal ducts to block the tears from draining away.The fluid contained in your own blood can be used to make special tear drops which are not artificial. These are called autologous serum tears.Special lenses or goggles are used to try to keep the moisture in your eyes.Also, some people may need other treatments if they have an underlying cause for their dry eyes.Dietary changesFats from fish oils (omega-3) in the diet, or as supplements, seem to improve dry eyes. Therefore, including oily fish in your diet once or twice a week may be beneficial. Some groups of people should be careful about the amount of oily fish in their diet, or omega-3 supplements (for example, pregnant women) so check with a healthcare professional or pharmacist.Contact lens wearersYou should not wear contact lenses whilst using many types of eye drops. Check with your doctor or pharmacist. It is often the preservative in the drops that may cause problems. Some types of drops are available without preservative, which are suitable for contact lens wearers.You should not wear contact lenses whilst using eye ointment.Dr Mary Lowth is an author or the original author of this leaflet.Previous article   Allergic Conjunctivitis Next article  Episcleritis and Scleritis  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Dry eye syndrome; NICE CKS, August 2017 (UK access only)O'Neil EC, Henderson M, Massaro-Giordano M, et al; Advances in dry eye disease treatment. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2019 May30(3):166-178. doi: 10.1097/ICU.0000000000000569.Kastelan S, Tomic M, Salopek-Rabatic J, et al; Diagnostic procedures and management of dry eye. Biomed Res Int. 20132013:309723. doi: 10.1155/2013/309723. Epub 2013 Aug 19.Pan Q, Angelina A, Marrone M, et al; Autologous serum eye drops for dry eye. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Feb 282:CD009327. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD009327.pub3.Pellegrini M, Senni C, Bernabei F, et al; The Role of Nutrition and Nutritional Supplements in Ocular Surface Diseases. Nutrients. 2020 Mar 3012(4):952. doi: 10.3390/nu12040952.Related InformationAnatomy of the eyeSjögren's Syndrome (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment) ProDry Eyes ProSjögren's Syndrome (Dry Mouth and Eyes)Pilocarpine tablets (Salagen)  Blue light filters: do they really work?    4 minutes reading time  03-Jul-23  How to reduce eye strain while watching TV    7 minutes reading time  14-May-22  How to relieve itchy eyes in the summer    6 minutes reading time  22-Jul-21  What to eat for healthy eyes    5 minutes reading time  08-Jan-18  On the morning of May 15, I all of a sudden was hit with this vision problem that I thought was a medical issue but thankfully nothing: my vision became out of focus, which is the best way to...   k81459Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy Peer reviewed by  Dr Doug McKechnie Document ID  4236 (v42)  Last updated on   24 February 2023 Next review date  23 February 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Allergic ConjunctivitisNext article Episcleritis and Scleritis Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Dry Eyes (Dry Eye Syndrome): Causes and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/eye-care/eye-problems/dry-eyesCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


