# Eczema Triggers and Irritants: Soap, Clothing, and Food | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Skincare and Conditions    Atopic Eczema  Eczema Triggers and Irritants Last updated by Dr Pippa Vincent   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 19 May 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Atopic Eczema      Emollients and Eczema Creams      Topical Steroids for Eczema      Discoid Eczema      Pompholyx      Eczema Herpeticum In this series     Atopic Eczema      Emollients and Eczema Creams      Topical Steroids for Eczema      Discoid Eczema      Pompholyx      Eczema Herpeticum In atopic eczema, avoiding certain causes (triggers) and irritants may help to prevent flare-ups of symptoms.In this article   What is eczema?   What are triggers and irritants?   Soaps and detergents   Toiletries and perfumes   Clothing   Temperature   Stress, habitual scratching and the itch-scratch cycle   Infection   Food allergy and eczema   House dust mite   Pets   Other possible triggers In This Article     Eczema Triggers and IrritantsIn this article What is eczema?  What are triggers and irritants?  Soaps and detergents  Toiletries and perfumes  Clothing  Temperature  Stress, habitual scratching and the itch-scratch cycle  Infection  Food allergy and eczema  House dust mite  Pets  Other possible triggers What is eczema?The terms eczema and dermatitis mean much the same - an inflammation of the skin. It is a skin condition that causes red, itchy, sensitive skin which is often very dry. There are two main types of dermatitis/eczema:Atopic eczemaThis is caused by a problem from within the body. People with atopic eczema are born with a tendency for their skin to become inflamed. Various parts of the skin tend to flare up with inflammation from time to time.Contact dermatitisThis is caused by a substance from outside the body. This typically causes patches of inflammation on areas of skin which have come into contact with the substance. If the offending substance is avoided, the skin inflammation should go away.The rest of this leaflet is only about factors that may trigger or irritate atopic eczema. See the separate leaflet called Atopic Eczema and one called Contact Dermatitis which provide a general overview of the conditions.What are triggers and irritants?In most people who have atopic eczema there is no apparent reason why the eczema may flare up from time to time. However, some flare-ups may be caused (triggered) or made worse by irritants to the skin or by other factors.This leaflet briefly discusses some possible triggers and irritants.Soaps and detergentsSoaps and detergents remove the natural oils from the skin. This tends to make the skin dry and itchy and more sensitive to irritants.People with atopic eczema/dermatitis should avoid soap as much as possible, and bubble bath and shower gel completely, when washing. Instead, a thick moisturiser (emollient) should be used as a soap substitute. See the separate leaflet called Emollients and Eczema Creams for details. Rubber gloves with a cotton lining should be worn when using detergents or working with other similar chemicals.Biological detergents and fabric conditioners are known trigger factors and can irritate the skin and make some people's eczema worse. It is important to rinse clothes well when hand-washing clothes with a detergent.Toiletries and perfumesSome people with eczema find that the perfumes, preservatives and alcohols in toiletries and make-up can be irritating. It may be best to avoid these, or only use bland products.ClothingCotton clothes should be worn next to the skin rather than potentially irritating fabrics such as wool. Some smooth man-made fabrics may be just as good as cotton.Suffer from dermatitis?Book a private appointment with a local pharmacist today to discover treatment options Book now TemperatureExtremes of temperature, dry air and humidity may cause eczema to flare up and trigger eczema symptoms in some people. It is best to try and avoid getting either too hot or too cold if this appears to be a trigger.Stress, habitual scratching and the itch-scratch cycleStress can cause eczema to flare up.Also some people react to stress by habit scratching and It is thought that scratching can make itching worse, which then causes worse scratching. This is called the itch-scratch cycle and can make eczema worse.It is important to try and avoid scratching eczema and, it helps to keep fingernails cut short so that any scratching is not so sharp and severe. Some people find it helps to wear cotton gloves at night if they tend to scratch in their sleep; anti-scratch mittens for babies are often very helpful. It is best to rub itchy areas with fingers rather than scratch with nails.Some people find that relaxation exercises or similar techniques help to reduce stress. This may help to reduce habit scratching, which may help to reduce the severity of eczema.InfectionInfection, often introduced by scratching, can aggravate eczema. You can read more about this in the separate leaflet called Atopic Eczema.Food allergy and eczema1 in 10 children with atopic eczema have a food allergy which can make symptoms worse. In general, it is young children with severe eczema who may have a food allergy as a trigger factor. The most common foods which cause (trigger) eczema symptoms in some people include: cow's milk, eggs, soya, wheat, fish and nuts.How do I know if food is making eczema worse?Some food allergies occur immediately. Symptoms develop within two hours of eating the trigger food. Itching and scratching may worsen shortly after eating it. A common sign is redness, swelling and irritation around the mouth. Another skin symptom that may develop is urticaria. In this condition, itchy, fluid-filled lumps appear on the skin - similar to nettle stings. Other symptoms may occur such as tummy (abdominal) pain, being sick (vomiting), wheezing, itchy eyes and sneezing.Delayed food allergy occurs in some cases. Symptoms develop 6-24 hours after eating the trigger food. Symptoms include worsening of itching and eczema. Sometimes abdominal pain and diarrhoea also occur.If there is a suspicion that a food is making eczema symptoms worse then it is useful to keep a food diary over 4-6 weeks before seeing the doctor, aiming to record any symptoms and all foods and drink taken. It may help to identify one or more suspect foods.Confirming a food allergy isn't always straightforward but blood tests can be of benefit and are often available via a GP. An exclusion diet is another option - in this case, the possible trigger food is cut out completely for at least 6 weeks to see if the eczema symptoms settle. The food should then be eaten again deliberately and, if the eczema gets worse, then the food should be avoided in futureHouse dust miteHouse dust mites are tiny insects that occur in every home. They are not visible without a microscope. They mainly live in bedrooms and mattresses as part of the dust.Many people with eczema are allergic to house dust mite. However in general, it is not usually advised to do anything about house dust mite. This is because:Research on whether removing house dust mites helps with eczema has so far been inconclusive. There is some evidence that reducing house dust mite may help but further research is really needed to confirm this.It is impossible to clear house dust mite completely from a home and it is hard work to reduce their number to a level which may be of benefit.Treatment with other methods such as moisturisers (emollients) and short courses of topical steroids usually works well. The effort of trying to eliminate house dust mite is not usually necessary.It has to be stressed, it is hard work and not usually recommended. However, if you want to try to reduce the numbers of house dust mite, a separate leaflet called House Dust Mite and Pet Allergy is available.PetsSome parents report that symptoms in children become worse when they are in contact with pets. It is an allergy to the animal's hair or saliva which may be responsible. If there is a suspicion that a pet may be the cause, it may be worth removing the pet to another home for a while to see if symptoms improve. For further information see the separate leaflet called House Dust Mite and Pet Allergy.Other possible triggersOther possible factors which may trigger symptoms, or make symptoms worse, include pollen, mould, pregnancy and hormonal changes before a period in women. However, these may not be avoidable. There may also be other factors which have not yet been identified which can trigger symptoms in people who have eczema.Previous article   Atopic Eczema Next article  Emollients and Eczema Creams  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Atopic eczema in children; NICE Clinical Guideline (December 2007, last updated March 2021)Eczema: Atopic Eczema; Primary Care Dermatology Society (PCDS)Related InformationAtopic Dermatitis and Eczema ProAtopic EczemaEmollients and Eczema CreamsTopical Steroids for EczemaEczema on Hands and Feet Pro  Which natural remedies help soothe eczema?    5 minutes reading time  23-Feb-24  Why eczema itches - and how to stop it    5 minutes reading time  10-Jan-24  What is the treatment for eczema?    15 minutes reading time  17-Apr-23  Everything you need to know about baby eczema    4 minutes reading time  04-May-23  Has anyone found** 80% cotton 20% polyester** to be goo material for atopic eczema sufferers? My order for clothes was supposed to be 100% cotton but the description doesn't state there was polyester...   David0032Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Pippa Vincent Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  4851 (v45)  Last updated on   19 May 2023 Next review date  12 May 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Atopic EczemaNext article Emollients and Eczema Creams Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Eczema Triggers and Irritants: Soap, Clothing, and Food     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/skin-conditions/atopic-eczema/eczema-triggers-and-irritantsCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


