# Endometrial Biopsy: Procedure and Complications | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Women's Health    Periods and Period Problems  Endometrial Biopsy Last updated by Dr Doug McKechnie   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 7 Jun 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Periods and Period Problems      Missed Periods      Heavy Periods (Menorrhagia)      Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS, PMT)      Fibroids      Delaying a Period In this series     Periods and Period Problems      Missed Periods      Heavy Periods (Menorrhagia)      Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS, PMT)      Fibroids      Delaying a Period An endometrial biopsy is a medical procedure where some tissue from the inner lining of the womb (uterus) is removed, and then examined under a microscope. It is a short day-case procedure. The sample is taken with a tube which is passed through the vagina.In this article   What can an endometrial biopsy show?   How do they do an endometrial biopsy?   Are endometrial biopsies painful?   What to expect after an endometrial biopsy   Are there any complications?   How long do endometrial biopsy results take?   Who can't have an endometrial biopsy? In This Article     Endometrial BiopsyIn this article What can an endometrial biopsy show?  How do they do an endometrial biopsy?  Are endometrial biopsies painful?  What to expect after an endometrial biopsy  Are there any complications?  How long do endometrial biopsy results take?  Who can't have an endometrial biopsy? What can an endometrial biopsy show?The point of an endometrial biopsy is to check the lining of the womb. Most commonly, this is done to check abnormal vaginal bleeding. For example in women who have bleeding after their menopause, or bleeding between their menstrual cycles.The test is done to check for cancer of the uterus (endometrial cancer). It is also to look for a thickening of the lining of the womb, called endometrial hyperplasia. The biopsy sample is checked, under a microscope, for abnormal cells or cancer cells. Most times, when this test is done, it shows that there is no cancer, but it is important to be sure.An endometrial biopsy is also sometimes done in women who are having treatment for infertility. In this case, the biopsy is to see if the lining of the womb has grown enough to be ready for a fertilised egg to be implanted.How do they do an endometrial biopsy?There are two ways to take an endometrial biopsy:An aspiration biopsy (often called a Pipelle biopsy).A hysteroscopy - looking into the womb using a camera, and finding an area to biopsy.This leaflet describes the procedure for an aspiration biopsy. See the hysteroscopy leaflet for more information about that procedure.An endometrial biopsy is a very quick test, and takes about 10 to 15 minutes. It is done as an outpatient procedure, in a hospital or community clinic, or sometimes a GP surgery.To perform a endometrial biopsy, you will be asked to undress from the waist down and to lie on the examination couch with your knees bent and your legs apart. It is similar to having a smear test. Much like for a smear test or a pelvic exam, a plastic instrument called a speculum is put into your vagina to open it up.The health professional doing the biopsy will then be able to see the neck of the womb (cervix) at the end of the speculum. A local anaesthetic is sometimes applied to the cervix. Sometimes a forceps-type instrument called a tenaculum is used to grip the cervix and hold it steady.A speculumA thin tube is then passed through the speculum into your vagina, through the cervix and into the womb. Most commonly the type of tube used currently is a Pipelle® cannula, although there are other types. The tube is moved up and down the inside lining of the womb, and sucks up some tissue as it does so.This is done a number of times to reach several parts of the lining of the womb. This tissue sample from the lining of the womb is then placed in liquid (called formalin) to preserve it until it reaches the lab where it will be examined under the microscope.Once the sample has been taken, the speculum is removed, and you can get dressed and go home.Worried about your health?Find a range of women's health pharmacy services, delivered by local providers at a time that suits you Book now Are endometrial biopsies painful?Endometrial biopsies are uncomfortable, and some women find them painful. If you can manage to relax the muscles of your vagina as the speculum is inserted, it is less uncomfortable.Those muscles are under your control (try it now!) and if they are not squeezed tightly shut, the speculum will pass more easily. It may be painful as the tube is passed through your cervix, and you may feel some cramping as the sample is being taken from the lining of the womb.The pain can be the same type of pain that you experience in a period, because the pain is caused by the same muscles of the uterus contracting. However, it can be more painful or intense. That said, for most women this is bearable.Some doctors recommend taking a pain reliever such as ibuprofen 30 mins to 1 hour before the procedure to reduce any pain. Ask your healthcare team if this is something they recommend for you.You may continue to have some period-like cramping pains for a day or so afterwards, and if you need a painkiller you can use whatever you normally use for period pains. For example, ibuprofen, or paracetamol.What to expect after an endometrial biopsyAs above, you may have some crampy period pains in the lower part of your tummy on and off for a day or two after the procedure. You may also have some light bleeding, like a period. This does not usually last longer than a few days. Use a sanitary towel if you need one.You should be able to drive straight after the procedure and go about your normal day.Are there any complications?It is very unusual to have complications after an endometrial biopsy. Rarely, the tube used can go right through the womb wall (perforate it). Occasionally there can be a lot of bleeding afterwards. Occasionally an infection can develop afterwards.If you experience severe pain, have a lot of bleeding, or develop a smelly discharge or fever in the week after the procedure, then see your doctor urgently.How long do endometrial biopsy results take?This will depend on your local laboratory, but usually takes between one and four weeks. The health professional who did the test will usually notify you of the result. They would normally tell you at the time of the biopsy how this will happen - it might be by phone, by letter, or in person at your next appointment.Who can't have an endometrial biopsy?In certain circumstances, an endometrial biopsy is not advisable. This includes:If you are pregnant.If you have a condition which causes you to bleed more easily, such as problems with your blood clotting system.If you have an infection of your womb, cervix, vagina or pelvis.Previous article   Fibroids Next article  Delaying a Period  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Dickson JM, Delaney B, Connor ME; Primary care endometrial sampling for abnormal uterine bleeding: a pilot study. J Fam Plann Reprod Health Care. 2017 Oct43(4):296-301. doi: 10.1136/jfprhc-2017-101735. Epub 2017 Aug 19.Narice BF, Delaney B, Dickson JM; Endometrial sampling in low-risk patients with abnormal uterine bleeding: a systematic review and meta-synthesis. BMC Fam Pract. 2018 Jul 3019(1):135. doi: 10.1186/s12875-018-0817-3.Related InformationEndometrial Sampling ProCancer of the Uterus (Endometrial Cancer)Endometrial Hyperplasia (Thickening of the Womb Lining)Periods and Period ProblemsPeriod Pain (Dysmenorrhoea)  What's the link between hair relaxers and fibroids?    7 minutes reading time  31-Jan-24  How to manage your period in school     10 minutes reading time  09-Oct-23  First period - supporting your child when they start menstruation    7 minutes reading time  03-Apr-23  Should you buy a menstrual cup? Eco-friendly period products    5 minutes reading time  29-May-18  hi there, I am currently on my pill break and my period is the heaviest it has ever been. Today i passed a large fleshly lump the length of my palm (photo attached) anyone know if this is normal or...   ellen58200Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Doug McKechnie Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  30698 (v2)  Last updated on   07 June 2023 Next review date  12 May 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  FibroidsNext article Delaying a Period Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Endometrial Biopsy: Procedure and Complications     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/womens-health/periods-and-period-problems/endometrial-biopsyCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


