# Epilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment) | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Brain and Nerves    Epilepsy and Seizures  Epilepsy with Absence Seizures Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Toni Hazell, MRCGP  Last updated 24 May 2022   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Epilepsy and Seizures      Types of Epilepsy and Seizures      Electroencephalograph (EEG)      Epilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment)      Epilepsy with Focal Seizures      Epilepsy Medication and Side-effects (Treatments for Epilepsy)  In this series     Epilepsy and Seizures      Types of Epilepsy and Seizures      Electroencephalograph (EEG)      Epilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment)      Epilepsy with Focal Seizures      Epilepsy Medication and Side-effects (Treatments for Epilepsy)  Absence seizures usually occur only in children and young people. Most people with this type of epilepsy grow out of it by the time they are adults. This leaflet discusses only the type of epilepsy with typical absence seizures. There are other types of 'atypical' absence seizures not dealt with in this leaflet.In this article   What is a seizure and what is epilepsy?   What is an absence seizure?   What causes absence seizures?   Diagnosing absence seizure epilepsy   Absence seizure treatment with medicines   What is the outlook? In This Article     Epilepsy with Absence SeizuresCauses, Symptoms, and TreatmentIn this article What is a seizure and what is epilepsy?  What is an absence seizure?  What causes absence seizures?  Diagnosing absence seizure epilepsy  Absence seizure treatment with medicines  What is the outlook? What is a seizure and what is epilepsy?A seizure is a short episode of symptoms caused by a burst of abnormal electrical activity in the brain. Typically, a seizure lasts from a few seconds to a few minutes. (Older words for seizures include convulsions and fits.)If you have epilepsy, it means that you have had repeated seizures. If you have a single seizure, it does not necessarily mean that you have epilepsy. About 1 person in 10 has a seizure at some time in their life. It may be the only one that occurs. The definition of epilepsy is more than one seizure. The frequency of seizures in people with epilepsy varies.For more information, see the separate leaflets called Epilepsy and Seizures and Types of Epilepsy and Seizures.What is an absence seizure?Absence seizure (previously called petit mal) is a form of generalised seizure. An absence seizure mainly occurs in children and young people. Absence seizures are uncommon in adults. Many people associate epilepsy with the dramatic convulsive type of seizure. Absence seizures are not like this. They are often not noticed for some time, as it can appear that the affected person is simply daydreaming. The following gives a typical example of an absence seizure:The person has a brief loss of consciousness (an absence) for a few seconds. They do not fall but may pause in what they are doing. Their face often looks pale with a blank expression. They may look dazed, the eyes stare and the eyelids may flutter a little. Sometimes their head may fall down a little, or their arms may shake once or twice. Each seizure usually starts and finishes abruptly. The person is not aware of the absence and resumes what they were doing.Absence seizures may not be noticed by parents or teachers for some time, as they usually last just a few seconds. It is common to have several absence seizures per day. If they are frequent, a child's education may suffer, as they will not be able to concentrate on lessons.Suffer from migraines?Book an appointment today to see what treatment options are available near you Book now What causes absence seizures?No underlying cause for absence seizures can usually be found in the brain. The bursts of abnormal electrical activity usually occur for no apparent reason. Why absence seizures start, or continue to occur, is unclear. What seems to happen is that the brain develops a low threshold for bursts of abnormal electrical activity.In some people, a tendency to develop absence seizures is inherited. How it is passed on is not clear but several members of an extended family may have this type of epilepsy. The parents of children with this type of epilepsy may wish to have genetic counselling to see if there is a chance of further children being affected.Diagnosing absence seizure epilepsyThe most important part of making a diagnosis is to have a clear description from parents or teachers of what happens during a suspected absence seizure. Often the description is typical of an absence seizure. However, sometimes it can be difficult for a doctor to be sure. The electroencephalograph (EEG) test is then helpful. This records the electrical impulses from the brain. Special stickers are put on parts of the scalp. They are connected to the EEG machine which amplifies the tiny electrical impulses given off by the brain and records their pattern on paper or a computer. The test is painless. People with absence seizures often have a typical EEG pattern.Absence seizure treatment with medicinesThere are several different medicines that can control absence seizures. They work by stabilising the electrical activity of the brain.Medication needs to be taken each day to control seizures. In most cases, one medicine can control seizures. A low dose is usually started at first. If this fails to control seizures, the dose may need to be increased or even changed to an alternative medication.A medicine called ethosuximide is recommended as first choice for absence seizures. Alternatives include sodium valproate, lamotrigine or levetiracetam. Sodium valproate should be avoided if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy. See also the separate leaflet on Epilepsy and Planning Pregnancy.See the separate leaflet called Treatments for Epilepsy.What is the outlook?The outlook (prognosis) is good. Absence seizures rarely continue into adulthood. This type of epilepsy is not usually associated with any other brain (neurological) condition. Children with this type of epilepsy have the same range of intelligence and other abilities as other children. Treatment usually controls the seizures so that education and other aspects of life can be normal. Absence seizure treatment can often be stopped in the teenage years.However, some children with absence seizures will have persistent seizures or develop other types of seizures (such as convulsive seizures (tonic-clonic seizures) later in life).Previous article   Epilepsy with Focal Seizures Next article  Epilepsy Medication and Side-effects (Treatments for Epilepsy)  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Epilepsies in children, young people and adults; NICE guidance (2022)Diagnosis and management of epilepsy in adults; Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network - SIGN (2015 - updated 2018)Epilepsy; NICE CKS, May 2021 (UK access only)Kessler SK, McGinnis E; A Practical Guide to Treatment of Childhood Absence Epilepsy. Paediatr Drugs. 2019 Feb21(1):15-24. doi: 10.1007/s40272-019-00325-x.Related InformationEpilepsy and SeizuresTypes of Epilepsy and SeizuresEpilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment)Epilepsy with Focal SeizuresElectroencephalograph (EEG)  Epilepsy and driving: what you need to know    4 minutes reading time  05-Apr-23  What to do when someone has an epileptic seizure    6 minutes reading time  11-Feb-19  Is it safe to take epilepsy medication during pregnancy?    6 minutes reading time  16-May-18  Hi everyone,What are the most valuable resources you've come across to manage your health journey? Is there any information in particular that's been the most useful? I'd love to learn from everyone'...   bright48990Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Toni Hazell, MRCGP Document ID  4460 (v43)  Last updated on   24 May 2022 Next review date  23 May 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Epilepsy with Focal SeizuresNext article Epilepsy Medication and Side-effects (Treatments for Epilepsy) Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Epilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/brain-nerves/epilepsy-and-seizures/epilepsy-with-absence-seizuresCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


