# Epilepsy with Focal Seizures (Causes,Symptoms, and Treatment) | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Brain and Nerves    Epilepsy and Seizures  Epilepsy with Focal Seizures Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Toni Hazell, MRCGP  Last updated 24 May 2022   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Epilepsy and Seizures      Types of Epilepsy and Seizures      Electroencephalograph (EEG)      Epilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment)      Epilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)      Epilepsy Medication and Side-effects (Treatments for Epilepsy)  In this series     Epilepsy and Seizures      Types of Epilepsy and Seizures      Electroencephalograph (EEG)      Epilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment)      Epilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)      Epilepsy Medication and Side-effects (Treatments for Epilepsy)  About 1 in 30 people in the UK develop epilepsy at some stage. It most commonly starts in infancy and in people aged over 50. However, epilepsy can begin at any age. About 7 in 10 children and adults with epilepsy will be seizure-free for five years (with or without antiepileptic medication), but 3 in 10 will have ongoing seizures..There are different types of epilepsy. This leaflet is about epilepsy with focal seizures (used to be called partial seizures).In this article   What is a seizure and what is epilepsy?   What is a focal seizure?   What are the symptoms of focal aware seizures?   Focal seizure treatment and management?   How can I help someone having a focal seizure? In This Article     Epilepsy with Focal SeizuresIn this article What is a seizure and what is epilepsy?  What is a focal seizure?  What are the symptoms of focal aware seizures?  Focal seizure treatment and management?  How can I help someone having a focal seizure? What is a seizure and what is epilepsy?A seizure is a short episode of symptoms caused by a burst of abnormal electrical activity in the brain. Typically, a seizure lasts from a few seconds to a few minutes. (Older words for seizures include convulsions and fits.)If you have epilepsy, it means that you have had repeated seizures. If you have a single seizure, it does not necessarily mean that you have epilepsy. About 1 person in 10 has a seizure at some time in their life. It may be the only one that occurs. The definition of epilepsy is more than one seizure. The frequency of seizures in people with epilepsy varies.There are different types of seizures but they are broadly divided into two main types - generalised and focal. Many people associate epilepsy with generalised convulsive seizures. However, some people develop focal seizures.For more information, see the separate leaflets called Epilepsy and Seizures, Types of Epilepsy and Seizures, Treatments for Epilepsy and Epilepsy and Planning Pregnancy.Suffer from migraines?Book an appointment today to see what treatment options are available near you Book now What is a focal seizure?With a focal seizure, the burst of electrical activity stays in one part of the brain. Therefore, you tend to have localised (focal) seizure symptoms. Different parts of the brain control different functions and so symptoms depend on which part of the brain is affected.Focal aware seizures (simple focal seizures)In this type of focal seizure you may have muscular jerks or strange sensations in one arm or leg. You may feel, hear, see, smell, or taste odd sensations. Some people develop pins and needles in one part of the body. However, you do not lose consciousness or awareness. A simple focal seizure usually lasts just a few seconds or minutes. For each individual, the same movement or sensation tends to recur each time a seizure occurs.Focal impaired awareness seizures (complex focal seizures)During this type of focal seizure, you are not aware of your surroundings or of what you are doing. In effect, you have a partial loss of consciousness (which differs from a simple focal seizure). This type of focal seizure can arise from any part of the brain but most commonly arises from a part of the brain called a temporal lobe. Therefore, this type is sometimes called a temporal lobe seizure.Sometimes a focal seizure develops into a generalised convulsive seizure. This is called a secondary generalised seizure.What are the symptoms of focal aware seizures?The symptoms will depend on which part of the brain is affected by the focal seizure.The temporal lobes of the brain help to deal with mood and behaviour. Therefore, you may have strange feelings, sensations and emotions during a complex focal seizure. It may feel like being in a dream. Your surroundings may appear strange or oddly familiar. It may be difficult to explain the feelings or sensations that occur. To an onlooker, you may appear to be in a trance or behave strangely for a few seconds or minutes. For example, you may wander with no apparent purpose. Some people smack their lips, fumble at clothes, appear to fidget, swallow repeatedly, or do other repetitive movements.Focal aware seizures that start in the frontal lobe of your brain may cause symptoms that include a strange feeling (like a wave) going through the head, or stiffness or twitching of a part of your body.Focal aware seizures that start in the parietal lobe of your brain may cause numbness or tingling, or an odd sensation that an arm or leg feels bigger or smaller than it actually is.Focal aware seizures starting in the occipital lobe may include visual disturbances (eg, coloured or flashing lights) or seeing something that isn't actually there (hallucinations).Focal seizure treatment and management?How can I help someone having a focal seizure?As focal seizures can take many different forms, bystanders need to take a common sense approach. Nearly all focal seizures stop within a few minutes by themselves. Gentle and quiet reassurance may be all that is needed until the seizure ends. If the affected person appears confused or is wandering, try to guide them away from any danger.Sometimes a focal seizure develops into a convulsive one, so be aware of this. It may be best to guide the person to sit down in a soft chair or away from any dangerous places. Stay with the person until they have recovered and are fully aware of their surroundings.Previous article   Epilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment) Next article  Epilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Epilepsies in children, young people and adults; NICE guidance (2022)Diagnosis and management of epilepsy in adults; Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network - SIGN (2015 - updated 2018)Epilepsy; NICE CKS, May 2021 (UK access only)Nevitt SJ, Sudell M, Cividini S, et al; Antiepileptic drug monotherapy for epilepsy: a network meta-analysis of individual participant data. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2022 Apr 14:CD011412. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD011412.pub4.Related InformationEpilepsy and SeizuresTypes of Epilepsy and SeizuresEpilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment)Epilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)Electroencephalograph (EEG)  Epilepsy and driving: what you need to know    4 minutes reading time  05-Apr-23  What to do when someone has an epileptic seizure    6 minutes reading time  11-Feb-19  Is it safe to take epilepsy medication during pregnancy?    6 minutes reading time  16-May-18  Hi everyone,What are the most valuable resources you've come across to manage your health journey? Is there any information in particular that's been the most useful? I'd love to learn from everyone'...   bright48990Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Toni Hazell, MRCGP Document ID  4448 (v43)  Last updated on   24 May 2022 Next review date  23 May 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Epilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment)Next article Epilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment) Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Epilepsy with Focal Seizures (Causes,Symptoms, and Treatment)     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/brain-nerves/epilepsy-and-seizures/epilepsy-with-focal-seizuresCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


