# Epilepsy with Tonic-Clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment) | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Brain and Nerves    Epilepsy and Seizures  Epilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures Causes and Treatment Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGP  Last updated 25 May 2022   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Epilepsy and Seizures      Types of Epilepsy and Seizures      Electroencephalograph (EEG)      Epilepsy with Focal Seizures      Epilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)      Epilepsy Medication and Side-effects (Treatments for Epilepsy)  In this series     Epilepsy and Seizures      Types of Epilepsy and Seizures      Electroencephalograph (EEG)      Epilepsy with Focal Seizures      Epilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)      Epilepsy Medication and Side-effects (Treatments for Epilepsy)  At least 1 in 30 people in the UK develop epilepsy at some stage. It most commonly starts in infancy and in people over the age of 50. However, epilepsy can begin at any age. Seizures are well controlled by treatment for most people with epilepsy. There are different types of epilepsy. This leaflet is about epilepsy with tonic-clonic seizures.In this article   What is a seizure and what is epilepsy?   What is a tonic-clonic seizure?   How can I help someone having a tonic-clonic seizure?   Tonic-clonic seizure treatment and management In This Article     Epilepsy with Tonic-clonic SeizuresCauses and TreatmentIn this article What is a seizure and what is epilepsy?  What is a tonic-clonic seizure?  How can I help someone having a tonic-clonic seizure?  Tonic-clonic seizure treatment and management What is a seizure and what is epilepsy?A seizure is a short episode of symptoms caused by a burst of abnormal electrical activity in the brain. Typically, a seizure lasts from a few seconds to a few minutes. (Older words for seizures include convulsions and fits.)If you have epilepsy, it means that you have had repeated seizures. If you have a single seizure, it does not necessarily mean that you have epilepsy. About 1 person in 10 has a seizure at some time in their life. It may be the only one that occurs. The definition of epilepsy is more than one seizure. The frequency of seizures in people with epilepsy varies.For more information, see the separate leaflets called Epilepsy and Seizures and Types of Epilepsy and Seizures.Suffer from migraines?Book an appointment today to see what treatment options are available near you Book now What is a tonic-clonic seizure?A tonic-clonic seizure is the most common type of generalised seizure. The following gives a typical description of a tonic-clonic seizure:Your body becomes rigid due to strong muscular contractions (the tonic part). You lose consciousness and fall. Your chest muscles contract and force air out of your mouth, often with a grunt. Your jaw muscles contract and you may bite your tongue. Saliva may escape from your mouth. Your bladder may contract and you may pass urine. This stiff or tonic phase soon passes into the clonic (shaking or convulsive) phase. This occurs when the muscles repeatedly contract and relax. Your whole body appears to shake. This may last from a few seconds to a few minutes.When the tonic-clonic seizure has stopped, you gradually regain consciousness but you may be confused and dazed for a while. The time taken to recover varies. You may have some soreness due to the muscular contractions. You may have a headache and want to sleep after a seizure.You may have some warning symptoms for a short while before a tonic-clonic seizure. This is called an aura. The aura can take various forms - for example, odd movements, odd sensations, or intense emotions. However, many people do not have auras, and a seizure commonly occurs without any warning.How can I help someone having a tonic-clonic seizure?A tonic-clonic seizure cannot be shortened or altered. However, a bystander can help in the following ways:During a tonic-clonic seizureNote the time.Do - prevent crowds gathering round.Do - place a cushion or some clothing under the person's head to prevent injury.Do not - try to restrain the person. If there is a warning (aura) before a tonic-clonic seizure, it may be possible to guide the person to a safe place or cushion the expected fall to the ground. When the seizure starts, do not try to hold the person upright but let them lie down.Do not - move the person unless they are in a dangerous place (for example, in a road or next to a fire). If possible, move dangerous objects away from the person.Do not - place anything in the person's mouth or try to move their tongue.Once the tonic-clonic seizure has stoppedDo - roll the person on to their side into the recovery position.Do - check that breathing has resumed normally. It is normal for breathing to stop for a short while during the stiff (tonic) part of the seizure. The face will go pale or bluish. During the convulsive (clonic) part, breathing is irregular. After the tonic-clonic seizure is over, breathing returns to normal. If not, check there is nothing stopping breathing, such as food or false teeth. The recovery position helps saliva and anything in the mouth - such as food or sick (vomit) - to drain out of the mouth and not back into the throat.Do - stay and talk to the person. Give reassurance until they are fully recovered. It may take a while for the person to wake up fully. Do not leave a person alone whilst they remain dazed or confused.Do not - offer something to eat or drink until you are sure they are fully recovered.Calling a doctor or an ambulanceThere is usually no need to call a doctor or an ambulance, unless:It is their first tonic-clonic seizure.Injury has occurred which cannot be dealt with.The tonic-clonic seizure does not stop after a few minutes. Status epilepticus is rare but means a seizure does not stop, or they keep recurring one after the other. This is an emergency and needs urgent treatment to stop the tonic-clonic seizure.There is difficulty with breathing.Tonic-clonic seizure treatment and managementThere are many different treatments for epilepsy and also medicines to help prevent people with epilepsy having seizures.Sodium valproate is recommended as first choice treatment for generalised tonic-clonic seizures inBoys and men.Girls aged under 10 years who are unlikely to need treatment when they are old enough to have children.Women who are unable to have children.Editor's noteDr Krishna Vakharia, 29th January 2024The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) has issued an update to the use of sodium valproate due to the risks associated with pregnancy and birth defects. These are:Valproate should not be started in any new patients - both male and female- younger than 55 years of age.If there is no other option for treatment or if pregnancy is not a risk, then two separate specialists must independently consider the drug and document why sodium valproate is appropriate.If you are already on the medicine, at the next review, a second signature will be needed to continue with the medicine.Do not stop taking valproate without advice from a specialist. This is because your condition may worsen without treatment.However sodium valproate should be avoided in pregnancy and so lamotrigine or levetiracetam is used as first choice for women and girls able to have children. This also includes young girls who are likely to need treatment when they are old enough to have children. See also the separate leaflet called Epilepsy and Planning Pregnancy.If sodium valproate does not control seizures and is stopped by your doctor, lamotrigine or levetiracetam should be offered as an alternative. If one of these is given and does not control seizures, the other one should be offered.If your seizures are not completely controlled by the first medication, your doctor may recommend adding a second treatment to use in addition. The options will depend on your individual circumstances. They include clobazam, lamotrigine, levetiracetam, perampanel, topiramate or sodium valproate (except in women and girls able to have children).If your epilepsy is still not controlled, your doctor may suggest switching your add-on treatment to brivaracetam, lacosamide, phenobarbitol, primidone or zonisamide.For information about treatments and prevention, see the separate leaflet called Treatments for Epilepsy.Previous article   Electroencephalograph (EEG) Next article  Epilepsy with Focal Seizures  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Epilepsies in children, young people and adults; NICE guidance (2022)Diagnosis and management of epilepsy in adults; Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network - SIGN (2015 - updated 2018)Epilepsy; NICE CKS, May 2021 (UK access only)Nevitt SJ, Sudell M, Cividini S, et al; Antiepileptic drug monotherapy for epilepsy: a network meta-analysis of individual participant data. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2022 Apr 14:CD011412. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD011412.pub4.Valproate (Belvo, Convulex, Depakote, Dyzantil, Epilim, Epilim Chrono or Chronosphere, Episenta, Epival, and Syonell▼): new safety and educational materials to support regulatory measures in men and women under 55 years of age; Medicines & Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, GOV.UK (January 2024)Related InformationEpilepsy and SeizuresTypes of Epilepsy and SeizuresEpilepsy with Focal SeizuresEpilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)Electroencephalograph (EEG)  Epilepsy and driving: what you need to know    4 minutes reading time  05-Apr-23  What to do when someone has an epileptic seizure    6 minutes reading time  11-Feb-19  Is it safe to take epilepsy medication during pregnancy?    6 minutes reading time  16-May-18  Hi everyone,What are the most valuable resources you've come across to manage your health journey? Is there any information in particular that's been the most useful? I'd love to learn from everyone'...   bright48990Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGP Document ID  4435 (v43)  Last updated on   25 May 2022 Next review date  24 May 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Electroencephalograph (EEG)Next article Epilepsy with Focal Seizures Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Epilepsy with Tonic-Clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment)     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/brain-nerves/epilepsy-and-seizures/epilepsy-with-tonic-clonic-seizuresCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


