# Epilepsy and Seizures: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Brain and Nerves  Epilepsy and Seizures Last updated by Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP  Last updated 20 Jun 2022   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Types of Epilepsy and Seizures      Electroencephalograph (EEG)      Epilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment)      Epilepsy with Focal Seizures      Epilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)      Epilepsy Medication and Side-effects (Treatments for Epilepsy)  In this series     Types of Epilepsy and Seizures      Electroencephalograph (EEG)      Epilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment)      Epilepsy with Focal Seizures      Epilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)      Epilepsy Medication and Side-effects (Treatments for Epilepsy)  About 1 in 30 people in the UK develop epilepsy at some stage in their lives. It most commonly starts in childhood and in people aged over 60. However, epilepsy can begin at any age. In general, seizures are well controlled by treatment in about 4 in 5 cases.In this article   What is epilepsy?   What is a seizure?   Different types of epilepsy and seizures   What causes epilepsy?   What triggers a seizure?   How is epilepsy diagnosed?   Can epilepsy be cured?   What are the treatments for epilepsy?   Other treatments for epilepsy   What is the outlook for people with epilepsy? In This Article     Epilepsy and SeizuresIn this article What is epilepsy?  What is a seizure?  Different types of epilepsy and seizures  What causes epilepsy?  What triggers a seizure?  How is epilepsy diagnosed?  Can epilepsy be cured?  What are the treatments for epilepsy?  Other treatments for epilepsy  What is the outlook for people with epilepsy? What is epilepsy?If you have epilepsy, it means that you have had repeated seizures. If you have a single seizure, it does not necessarily mean that you have epilepsy. About 1 person in 20 has a seizure at some time in their life. It may be the only one that occurs. The definition of epilepsy is more than one seizure. The frequency of seizures in people with epilepsy varies. In some cases there may be years between seizures. At the other extreme, in some cases the seizures occur every day. For others, the frequency of seizures is somewhere in between these extremes.Epilepsy can affect anyone at any age. Around 456,000 people in the UK have epilepsy.Epileptic seizures arise from within the brain. A seizure can also be caused by external factors which may affect the brain. For example, a high temperature (fever) may cause a febrile seizure (febrile convulsion). Other causes of seizures include lack of oxygen, a low blood sugar level, poisons and a lot of alcohol. Seizures caused by these external factors are not classed as epilepsy. Our picks for Epilepsy and Seizures Epilepsy and driving: what you need to knowIf you have epilepsy and want to learn to drive or already have a licence, there are rules and r...   4min  Epilepsy and driving: what you need to know   4min  What to do when someone has an epileptic seizure   6min  Is it safe to take epilepsy medication during pregnancy?   6min  What to do when someone has an epileptic seizure   6minWhat is a seizure?A seizure is a short episode of symptoms caused by a burst of abnormal electrical activity in the brain. Typically, a seizure lasts from a few seconds to a few minutes. (Older words for seizures include convulsions and 'fits'.)The brain contains millions of nerve cells (neurons). Normally, the nerve cells are constantly sending tiny electrical messages down the nervous system to all parts of the body. Different areas of the brain control different parts and functions of the body. Therefore, the symptoms that occur during a seizure depend on where the abnormal burst of electrical activity occurs. Symptoms that may occur during a seizure can affect your muscles, sensations, behaviour, emotions, consciousness or a combination of these. The different types of seizures are discussed below.Different types of epilepsy and seizuresSeizures are divided into two main types - generalised and focal (used to be called partial). There are also other uncommon types of seizure. If you have epilepsy you usually have recurrences of the same type of seizure. However, some people have different types of seizures at different times. See also the separate leaflet called Types of Epilepsy and Seizures.Generalised seizuresThese occur if the abnormal electrical activity affects all or most of the brain. The symptoms tend to be general and involve much of your body.There are various types of generalised seizure:A tonic-clonic seizure (these were previously called grand mal seizures) is the most common type of generalised seizure. With this type of seizure your whole body stiffens, you lose consciousness and then your body shakes (convulses) due to uncontrollable muscle contractions.An absence seizure (these used to be called petit mal) is another type of generalised seizure. With this type of seizure you have a brief loss of consciousness or awareness. There is no convulsion, you do not fall over and it usually lasts only seconds. Absence seizures mainly occur in children.A myoclonic seizure is caused by a sudden contraction of the muscles, which causes a jerk. These can affect the whole body but often occur in just one or both arms.A tonic seizure causes a brief loss of consciousness and you may become stiff and fall to the ground.An atonic seizure causes you to become limp and to collapse, often with only a brief loss of consciousness.Focal seizuresIn focal seizures the burst of electrical activity starts in, and stays in, one part of the brain. Therefore, you tend to have localised (focal) symptoms. Different parts of the brain control different functions and so symptoms depend on which part of the brain is affected:Simple focal seizures are one type. You may have muscular jerks or strange sensations in one arm or leg. You may develop an odd taste, or pins and needles in one part of your body. You do not lose consciousness or awareness.Complex focal seizures are another type. These commonly but not always arise from a part of the brain called the temporal lobe - you have two temporal lobes, one on each side of the brain just behind your temples. Therefore, this type is sometimes called temporal lobe epilepsy. Depending on the part of the brain affected, you may behave strangely for a few seconds or minutes. For example, you may fiddle with an object, or mumble, or wander aimlessly. In addition, you may have odd emotions, fears, feelings, visions or sensations. These differ from simple focal seizures in that your consciousness is affected. You may not remember having a seizure.Sometimes a focal seizure develops into a generalised seizure. This is called a secondary generalised seizure.Suffer from migraines?Book an appointment today to see what treatment options are available near you Book now What causes epilepsy?Unknown cause (idiopathic epilepsy)In many cases, no cause for the seizures can be found. The abnormal bursts of electrical activity in the brain occur for no known reason. It is unclear why they start, or continue to occur. People with idiopathic epilepsy usually have no other brain (neurological) condition. Medication to control seizures usually works very well.Is epilepsy hereditary?Hereditary (genetic) factors may play a part in some cases: 1 in 3 people with epilepsy have a family member who also has it. Genetic factors are more likely if you develop epilepsy at a very young age. People with certain genetic conditions are more likely than average to have epilepsy. These conditions include:Tuberous sclerosis.Fragile X syndrome.Rett syndrome.Neurofibromatosis.Symptomatic epilepsyIn some cases, an underlying brain condition or brain damage causes epilepsy. Some conditions are present at birth. Some conditions develop later in life. There are many such conditions - for example:A patch of scar tissue in a part of the brain.A head or brain injury.A stroke.Cerebral palsy.Growths or tumours of the brain.Previous infections of the brain, such as meningitis and encephalitis.The condition may irritate the surrounding brain cells and trigger seizures.Some underlying conditions may cause no other problems apart from seizures. In other cases, the underlying condition may cause other problems or disabilities in addition to the seizures.These days, with modern scans and tests, a cause can be found for some cases previously thought to be of unknown cause. These might include a small piece of scar tissue in the brain or a small abnormality of some blood vessels inside the brain. These may now be found by modern brain scanning equipment which is more sophisticated than in the past.What triggers a seizure?There is often no apparent reason why a seizure occurs at one time and not at another. However, some people with epilepsy find that certain triggers make a seizure more likely. These are not the cause of epilepsy but may trigger a seizure on some occasions.Possible triggers may include:Stress or anxiety.Some medicines such as antidepressants, and antipsychotic medication (these lower the seizure threshold in the brain).Lack of sleep, or tiredness.Irregular meals (or skipping meals) which may cause a low blood sugar level.Heavy alcohol intake or using street drugs.Flickering lights such as from strobe lighting or video games.Periods (menstruation).Illnesses which cause high temperature (fever), such as flu or other infections.How is epilepsy diagnosed?You should see a doctor if you have had a possible seizure or similar event. Sometimes it is difficult for a doctor to confirm that you have had a seizure. The most important part of confirming the diagnosis is the description of what happened. Other conditions can look like seizures - for example, faints, panic attacks, collapses due to heart problems, breath-holding attacks in children.Therefore, it is important that a doctor should have a clear description of what happened during the event. It may be that a person who witnessed your seizure may be able to give a more accurate description of what happened during your seizure.There is no one test to confirm a diagnosis of epilepsy. However, tests such as brain scans, an electroencephalogram (EEG - brainwave recordings) and blood tests may help to make a diagnosis.A brain scan - usually a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan or computerised tomography (CT) scan - shows the structure of different parts of the brain. This may be performed in some people.Electroencephalograph (EEG). This test records the electrical activity of the brain. Special stickers are placed on various parts of the scalp. They are connected to the EEG machine. This amplifies the tiny electrical messages given off by the brain and records their pattern on paper or computer. The test is painless. Some types of seizure produce typical EEG patterns. However, a normal recording does not rule out epilepsy and not all EEG abnormalities are related to epilepsy.Electrocardiogram (ECG). Sometimes a seizure can be triggered by an issue with your heart, such as an abnormal heart rhythm. Seizures due to heart rhythm problems are not classed as epilepsy.Blood tests and other tests may be advised to check on your general well-being. They may also look for other possible causes of the event.Although helpful, tests are not foolproof. It is possible to have epilepsy with normal test results. Also, if an abnormality is found on a brain scan, it does not prove that it causes seizures.However, tests may help to decide if the event was a seizure, or caused by something else. It is unusual for a diagnosis of epilepsy to be made after one seizure, as the definition of epilepsy is recurrent seizures. For this reason a doctor may suggest to wait and see if it happens again before making a firm diagnosis of epilepsy.Can epilepsy be cured?Epilepsy cannot be cured with medication. However, with the right type and strength of medication, the majority of people with epilepsy do not have seizures.What are the treatments for epilepsy?See also the separate leaflets called Treatments for Epilepsy and Living with Epilepsy.MedicationFor more details on the recommendations, see our leaflet called Treatments for Epilepsy.Epilepsy medicines work by stabilising the electrical activity of the brain. You need to take medication every day to prevent seizures. Deciding on which medicine to prescribe depends on such things as:Your type of epilepsy.Your age.Other medicines that you may take for other conditions, and their possible side-effects.Whether you are pregnant.Whether you are planning a pregnancy.One medicine can prevent seizures in most cases. A low dose is usually started at first. The dose may be increased if this fails to prevent seizures. In some cases two medicines are needed to prevent seizures.The decision when to start medication may be difficult. A first seizure may not mean that you have epilepsy, as a second seizure may never happen or may occur years later. The decision to start medication should be made by weighing up all the pros and cons of starting, or not starting, the medicine. It is unusual to start treatment after a first seizure. A common option is to wait and see after a first seizure. If you have a second seizure within a few months, more are likely.Medication is commonly started after a second seizure that occurs within 12 months of the first. However, there are no definite rules and the decision to start medication should be made after a full discussion with your doctor.The type of treatment you will be given often depends on the type of seizures you have and also if you are taking any other medication.If you are a woman of childbearing age (or might want to have children in the future) there are extra factors to consider. Your doctor will discuss these in detail with you. This is because:Some treatments can reduce the effectiveness of some forms of hormonal contraception.Taking some treatments when you become pregnant or during pregnancy can put you at increased risk of your baby being born with medical problems.Some points about medication for epilepsy include the following:Ask your doctor how long treatment is likely to be advised. This will vary from case to case. If you have not had seizures for several years, you may wish to try stopping medication. However, this depends on your particular type of epilepsy, as some types will need medication for life. Your life circumstances may influence the decision about stopping medication. For example, if you have recently regained your driving licence, the risk of losing it again for a year if a seizure occurs may affect your decision. However, if you are a teenager who has been free of seizures for some years, you may be happy to take the risk.Although the list of possible side-effects for each medicine seems long, in practice, most people have few or no side-effects, or just minor ones. Ask your doctor which side-effects are important to look out for. If you develop a troublesome side-effect it may be dose-related, or may settle in time. Alternatively, a switch to another medicine may be advised.Medicines which are used for other conditions may interfere with medication for epilepsy. If you are prescribed or buy another medicine, remind your doctor or pharmacist that you take medication for epilepsy. Even things like indigestion medicines may interact with your epilepsy medication. Any interaction may increase your chance of having a seizure.Some medicines for epilepsy interfere with the contraceptive pill. A higher-dose pill or an alternative method of contraception may be needed.Tell your doctor if you intend to become pregnant. Pre-conception counselling is important for women with epilepsy. See the separate leaflet called Epilepsy and Planning Pregnancy.If you have epilepsy and take medication, you are exempt from prescription charges for all your prescriptions. You need an exemption certificate. You can get this from your pharmacist.Other treatments for epilepsySurgery to remove a small part of the brain which is the underlying cause of the epilepsy. Epilepsy surgery is only a suitable option if your seizures start in one small area of your brain (this means it is only possible for a minority of people with epilepsy). It may be considered when medication fails to prevent seizures. However, there are risks from operations. Only a small number of people with epilepsy are suitable for surgery. Even for those who are, there are no guarantees of success. Surgical techniques continue to improve and surgery may become an option for more and more people in the future.Vagal nerve stimulation is a treatment for epilepsy. A small generator is implanted under the skin below the left collarbone. The vagus nerve is stimulated to reduce the frequency and intensity of seizures. This can be suitable for some people with seizures that are difficult to control with medication.The ketogenic diet is a diet very high in fat, low in protein and almost carbohydrate-free. This diet can be effective in the treatment of difficult-to-control seizures in children.Complementary therapies such as aromatherapy may help with relaxation and relieve stress. However, they have no proven effect on preventing seizures.What is the outlook for people with epilepsy?The success in preventing seizures by medication varies depending on your type of epilepsy. For example, if no underlying cause can be found for your seizures (idiopathic epilepsy), there is a very good chance that medication can fully control your seizures. Seizures caused by some underlying brain problems may be more difficult to control.The overall outlook (prognosis) is better than many people realise. The following figures are based on studies of people with epilepsy, which looked back over a five-year period. These figures are based on grouping people with all types of epilepsy together, which gives an overall picture:About 5 in 10 people with epilepsy will have no seizures at all over a five-year period. Many of these people will be taking medication to stop seizures. Some will have stopped treatment having had two or more years without a seizure whilst taking medication.About 3 in 10 people with epilepsy will have some seizures in this five-year period but far fewer than if they had not taken medication.So, in total, with medication, about 8 in 10 people with epilepsy are well controlled with either no, or few, seizures.The remaining 2 in 10 people experience seizures, despite medication.A very small number of people with epilepsy have sudden unexplained death. The exact cause of this is unknown. However, it may be related to a change in the breathing pattern or to abnormal heart rhythms during a seizure. This is rare and the vast majority of people with epilepsy fully recover following each seizure.A trial without medication may be an option if you have not had any seizures for 2-3 years. If a decision to stop treatment is made, a gradual reduction of the dose of medication is usually advised over several months. You should never stop taking medication without discussing it with a doctor.The above section on outlook relates just to seizures. Some underlying brain conditions which cause seizures may cause additional problems.See the separate leaflet called Sudden Unexpected Death in Epilepsy. Next article  Types of Epilepsy and Seizures  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Epilepsies in children, young people and adults; NICE guidance (2022)Diagnosis and management of epilepsy in adults; Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network - SIGN (2015 - updated 2018)Antiepileptic drugs in pregnancy: updated advice following comprehensive safety review; GOV.UK - Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (January 2021)Epilepsy; NICE CKS, April 2022 (UK access only)Following a first seizure without a fever in children and young people - Information for parents and carers; Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health (RCPCH), 2019Scheffer IE, Berkovic S, Capovilla G, et al; ILAE classification of the epilepsies: Position paper of the ILAE Commission for Classification and Terminology. Epilepsia. 2017 Apr58(4):512-521. doi: 10.1111/epi.13709. Epub 2017 Mar 8.Deep brain stimulation for refractory epilepsy in adults; NICE Interventional procedures guidance, August 2020Assessing fitness to drive: guide for medical professionals; Driver and Vehicle Licensing AgencyRelated InformationWhat to do when someone has an epileptic seizureTypes of Epilepsy and SeizuresEpilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment)Epilepsy Medication and Side-effects (Treatments for Epilepsy) Epilepsy with Focal Seizures  Epilepsy and driving: what you need to know    4 minutes reading time  05-Apr-23  What to do when someone has an epileptic seizure    6 minutes reading time  11-Feb-19  Is it safe to take epilepsy medication during pregnancy?    6 minutes reading time  16-May-18  Hi everyone,What are the most valuable resources you've come across to manage your health journey? Is there any information in particular that's been the most useful? I'd love to learn from everyone'...   bright48990Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Document ID  4433 (v44)  Last updated on   20 June 2022 Next review date  19 June 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Next article Types of Epilepsy and Seizures Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Epilepsy and Seizures: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/brain-nerves/epilepsy-and-seizuresCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


