# ERCP (Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography) | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Digestive Health    Gallstones and Bile  ERCP Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy  Last updated 13 Nov 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Gallstones and Bile      Cholecystitis      Acute Pancreatitis In this series     Gallstones and Bile      Cholecystitis      Acute Pancreatitis ERCP is a procedure that uses an endoscope and X-rays to look at the bile duct and the pancreatic duct. ERCP can also be used to remove gallstones or take small samples of tissue for analysis (a biopsy).Note: the information below is a general guide only. The arrangements and the way tests are performed may vary between different hospitals. Always follow the instructions given by the doctor or local hospital.In this article   What is an ERCP?   What happens during an ERCP procedure?   Preparing for an ERCP   What to expect after an ERCP   Complications of an ERCP In This Article     ERCPEndoscopic Retrograde CholangiopancreatographyIn this article What is an ERCP?  What happens during an ERCP procedure?  Preparing for an ERCP  What to expect after an ERCP  Complications of an ERCP What is an ERCP?ERCP stands for 'endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography'. ERCP is a very useful procedure, as it can be used both to diagnose and to treat various conditions, such as:Gallstones.Acute pancreatitis - inflammation of the pancreas that develops quickly over a few days.Chronic pancreatitis - inflammation of the pancreas that is more persistent.An endoscope is a thin, flexible tube. It is passed through the mouth, into the gullet (oesophagus) and down towards the stomach and the first part of the gut after the stomach (duodenum).The endoscope contains fibre-optic channels which allow light to shine down so the doctor can see inside. Cholangiopancreatography means X-ray pictures of the bile duct and pancreatic duct. These ducts do not show up very well on ordinary X-ray pictures. However, if a contrast dye that blocks X-rays is injected into these ducts then X-ray pictures will show up these ducts clearly.Some dye is injected through an opening called 'the papilla' back up into the bile and pancreatic ducts (a 'retrograde' injection). This is done via a plastic tube in a side channel of the endoscope. X-ray pictures are then taken.Prior to having an ERCP, blood pressure, heart rate, respiration and oxygen levels will be recorded. If a person has diabetes, the blood sugar level will also be checked and recorded. Blood tests may also be needed prior to the ERCP. The procedure will be discussed in detail and a consent form signed once the procedure is fully understood.Want to see a dietician?Book a private assessment with a qualified dietician today. Book now What happens during an ERCP procedure?The doctor may numb the back of the throat by spraying on some local anaesthetic, or may give a lozenge to suck. A sedative will usually be given by an injection into a vein in the back of the hand or arm. The sedative causes drowsiness and relaxes but it is not like a general anaesthetic.While lying on n a couch, lying on one side, the first section of the endoscope is swallowed. Modern endoscopes are quite thin (thinner than an index finger) and quite easy to swallow. The doctor then gently pushes it down the oesophagus into the stomach and duodenum.The doctor looks down the endoscope via an eyepiece or on a TV monitor which is connected to the endoscope. Air is passed down a channel in the endoscope into the stomach and the first part of the duodenum. This enables the lining to be seen more easily. It often causes a feeling of 'fullness' and wanting to belch.The endoscope also has a 'side channel' down which various tubes or instruments can pass. These can be manipulated by the doctor who can do various things. For example:Inject a dye into the bile and pancreatic ducts. X-ray pictures taken immediately after the injection of dye show up the detail of the ducts. This may show narrowing (stricture), stuck gallstones, tumours pressing on the ducts, etc.Take a small sample (biopsy) from the lining of the duodenum, stomach, or pancreatic or bile duct near to the opening called the papilla. The biopsy sample can be looked at under the microscope to check for abnormal tissue and cells.If the X-rays show a gallstone stuck in the duct, the doctor can widen the opening of the papilla to let the stone out into the duodenum. A stone can be grabbed by a 'basket' or left to be passed out with the stools (faeces).If the X-rays show a narrowing or blockage in the bile duct, the doctor can put a stent inside to open it wide. A stent is a small wire-mesh or plastic tube. This then allows bile to drain into the duodenum in the normal way. The stent can remain permanently in place without being aware that it is there.The endoscope is gently pulled out when the procedure is finished. An ERCP can take anything from 30 minutes to over an hour, depending on what is done.Preparing for an ERCPInstructions will be provided by the hospital department before an ERCP. The sort of instructions given include:Not eating for six hours before the procedure. (Small sips of water may be allowed up to two hours before the procedure.)Advice about any usual medication that should be stopped before the procedure.Taking antibiotics before the procedure. This depends on the reason for having this test done.What to expect after an ERCPIf the procedure was done just to obtain X-ray pictures then most people are ready to go home after resting for a few hours. Driving, operating machinery or drinking alcohol must be avoided for 24 hours after having the sedative.If going home on the same day as the procedure, it is important to have somebody to accompany home and to stay with for 24 hours until the effects of the sedative have fully worn off.Most people are able to resume normal activities after 24 hours. Because of the effect of the sedative, most people remember very little about the procedure. A short hospital stay may be needed following a procedure such as removing a gallstone or inserting a small wire-mesh or plastic tube (a stent).Complications of an ERCPMost ERCPs are done without any problems. Some people have a mild sore throat for a day or so afterwards. Feeling tired or sleepy for several hours, caused by the sedative, is common.Uncommon complications include the following:Occasionally, the endoscope causes some damage to the gut, bile duct or pancreatic duct. This may cause bleeding, infection and, rarely, perforation. If any of the following occur within 48 hours after an ERCP, a doctor should be contacted immediately:Tummy (abdominal) pain - in particular, if it becomes gradually worse and is different or more intense to any 'usual' indigestion pains or heartburn.Raised temperature (fever).Difficulty breathing.Bringing up (vomiting) blood.Inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis) sometimes occurs after ERCP. This can be serious in some cases.The risk of complications is higher if already in poor general health. The benefit from this procedure needs to be weighed up against the small risk of complications.It may still be possible to perform ERCP during pregnancy, providing certain precautions are taken. Alternatively, it may be possible to delay it or use another type of procedure.Previous article   Acute PancreatitisAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Riff BP, Chandrasekhara V; The Role of Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography in Management of Pancreatic Diseases. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2016 Mar45(1):45-65. doi: 10.1016/j.gtc.2015.10.009.Meseeha M, Attia M; Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography. StatPearls Publishing, August 2023.Ribeiro IB, do Monte Junior ES, Miranda Neto AA, et al; Pancreatitis after endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography: A narrative review. World J Gastroenterol. 2021 May 2827(20):2495-2506. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v27.i20.2495.Azab M, Bharadwaj S, Jayaraj M, et al; Safety of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) in pregnancy: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Saudi J Gastroenterol. 2019 Nov-Dec25(6):341-354. doi: 10.4103/sjg.SJG_92_19.Related InformationEndoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography ProNausea and VomitingJaundiceEndoscopic Ultrasound ScanJaundice (Causes and Treatment) Pro  Gallstones diet sheet  Could it be gallstones?    4 minutes reading time  22-Feb-23  Summer crunch salad    10min cooking time   Can you get gallstones when you're young?    4 minutes reading time  09-Oct-17  Hello I was wondering if anyone noticed a strange bump above the belly button after the gallbladder removal. When I look at the mirror sideways I see a bump I know I did not have before. I thought it...   carolina68962Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy Document ID  4757 (v42)  Last updated on   13 November 2023 Next review date  11 November 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Acute PancreatitisHealth informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on ERCP (Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography)     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/digestive-health/gallstones-and-bile/ercp-endoscopic-retrograde-cholangiopancreatographyCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


