# Features | SARS and MERS Virus | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search SARS and MERS VirusFeatures  Is it COVID-19 or flu this winter?    7 minutes reading time  18-Dec-23  Will we need a COVID-19 booster vaccine every year?    4 minutes reading time  23-Oct-23  Why it's a good thing if you feel unwell after your COVID-19 booster jab    3 minutes reading time  20-Oct-23  What are the school COVID rules October 2023?     3 minutes reading time  20-Oct-23  How to treat COVID at home    5 minutes reading time  16-Oct-23  What are the symptoms of the COVID-19 variant Pirola?    3 minutes reading time  09-Oct-23  What are the benefits of mixing and matching COVID-19 booster vaccines?    5 minutes reading time  06-Oct-23  COVID-19: How to book your booster jab before the autumn and winter waves    2 minutes reading time  21-Sep-23  National Day of Reflection: coping with grief after losing a loved one to COVID-19    7 minutes reading time  21-Mar-22  Bad posture: how to defeat the 'COVID slump'    7 minutes reading time  08-Mar-22  COVID-19: What is herd immunity and will we ever reach it?    6 minutes reading time  14-Feb-22  Do you get better COVID-19 immunity from vaccination or infection?    6 minutes reading time  27-Jan-22  What we know about the IHU COVID-19 variant    4 minutes reading time  19-Jan-22  Flurona: What we know about COVID-19 and flu combined infection    5 minutes reading time  12-Jan-22  What is the COVID-19 antibody blood test and should I get one?    8 minutes reading time  08-Jan-22  Coping with anxiety around COVID-19 uncertainty    10 minutes reading time  30-Dec-21  COVID-19: Can lockdowns change our personalities?    5 minutes reading time  22-Dec-21  COVID-19: Should you cancel your Christmas plans because of Omicron?    4 minutes reading time  21-Dec-21  COVID-19: Should vulnerable people shield because of Omicron?    5 minutes reading time  21-Dec-21  COVID-19: What is post-pandemic stress disorder and how can it affect your heart?    6 minutes reading time  18-Dec-21  COVID-19: How contagious is Omicron?    6 minutes reading time  17-Dec-21  COVID-19 boosters and pregnancy: Are they safe and should you get them?    6 minutes reading time  16-Dec-21  COVID-19: When should you do a lateral flow test and when should you do a PCR?    5 minutes reading time  16-Dec-21  COVID-19: Is Omicron a bigger threat than the Delta variant?    4 minutes reading time  16-Dec-21  COVID-19: when do experts predict life will return to normal?    6 minutes reading time  16-Dec-21  How to book your COVID-19 booster vaccine    3 minutes reading time  15-Dec-21  COVID-19: how do Omicron symptoms compare to other variants?    5 minutes reading time  15-Dec-21  What COVID-19 vaccines and medications are available around the world?    7 minutes reading time  02-Dec-21  COVID-19: how to stay safe this Christmas     5 minutes reading time  01-Dec-21  Coronavirus: what are asymptomatic and mild COVID-19?    8 minutes reading time  01-Dec-21  Are the new COVID-19 swab tests accurate?    9 minutes reading time  26-Nov-21  Can zinc lozenges protect against coughs, colds, flu, and COVID-19?    5 minutes reading time  24-Nov-21  Should you wear a face mask if you have a cold this winter?    5 minutes reading time  23-Nov-21  Should we wear face masks after the pandemic?    5 minutes reading time  04-Nov-21  Does being vaccinated against COVID-19 stop you getting infected?    4 minutes reading time  30-Oct-21  How to protect yourself from COVID-19 and flu in pregnancy    7 minutes reading time  28-Oct-21  Why are women so vulnerable to COVID-19 in pregnancy?    6 minutes reading time  26-Oct-21  How to ventilate safely to protect against COVID-19 this winter    5 minutes reading time  22-Oct-21  Are we prepared to fight flu and COVID-19 this winter?    9 minutes reading time  18-Oct-21  Can the COVID vaccine affect the menstrual cycle?    6 minutes reading time  11-Oct-21  COVID-19: how to avoid catching viruses at work    7 minutes reading time  14-Sep-21  How to help your child adjust to a post-COVID world    6 minutes reading time  18-Aug-21  How to manage health anxiety in a post-pandemic world    5 minutes reading time  30-Jul-21  Shielders: how can vulnerable people stay safe as restrictions end?    8 minutes reading time  29-Jul-21  19th July: staying safe as COVID-19 restrictions ease    7 minutes reading time  19-Jul-21  Should children get the COVID-19 vaccine?    6 minutes reading time  15-Jul-21  How to hang on to a lockdown lifestyle    6 minutes reading time  15-Jul-21  Are we prepared for another pandemic?    6 minutes reading time  12-Jul-21  How to build your confidence post-lockdown    6 minutes reading time  08-Jul-21  What you need to know about the COVID-19 vaccine    9 minutes reading time  05-Jul-21  Should you be worried about the Indian COVID-19 variant?    6 minutes reading time  25-May-21  How to meet friends and family safely outdoors    7 minutes reading time  17-May-21  May lockdown easing: what are the new restrictions?    8 minutes reading time  17-May-21  How to speak to someone who's hesitant about vaccines    7 minutes reading time  07-May-21  Why it's normal to feel anxious about a post-COVID future    6 minutes reading time  09-Apr-21  A year on: what we now know about COVID-19    7 minutes reading time  24-Mar-21  How are universities supporting students during the COVID-19 pandemic?    7 minutes reading time  17-Mar-21  AstraZeneca vaccine: is it safe and does it cause blood clots?    7 minutes reading time  16-Mar-21  Can lifestyle changes reduce your COVID-19 risk?    7 minutes reading time  10-Mar-21  COVID-19: how to use pharmacies during the coronavirus pandemic    4 minutes reading time  08-Mar-21  COVID-19: how to manage back-to-school worries    6 minutes reading time  05-Mar-21  Lockdown easing: what is the plan and is it realistic?    8 minutes reading time  26-Feb-21  When will I get my COVID-19 vaccine?    10 minutes reading time  23-Feb-21  How to maintain a healthy lifestyle during lockdown    4 minutes reading time  22-Feb-21  Is the pandemic affecting children's development?    7 minutes reading time  16-Feb-21  How to stay on top of unhealthy habits in lockdown    7 minutes reading time  09-Feb-21  Coronavirus: how quickly do COVID-19 symptoms develop and how long do they last?    9 minutes reading time  08-Jan-21  COVID-19 coronavirus: how to self-isolate    6 minutes reading time  08-Jan-21  COVID-19 coronavirus: what to do if you need to see a GP or get medication    5 minutes reading time  08-Jan-21  What are the rules for the January 2021 national lockdown?    5 minutes reading time  07-Jan-21  COVID-19 - coping with loneliness this Christmas    5 minutes reading time  22-Dec-20 Sponsored  How to choose the right face mask for you    7 minutes reading time  10-Dec-20  Why it’s difficult to switch off during the pandemic    5 minutes reading time  26-Nov-20  The latest treatments for COVID-19    8 minutes reading time  17-Nov-20  What happens if you catch flu and COVID-19 at the same time?    5 minutes reading time  13-Nov-20  Test and trace: how does it work?    6 minutes reading time  29-Oct-20  Face coverings: what should you look for in a homemade mask?    6 minutes reading time  28-Oct-20  COVID-19: how to stay safe at work    7 minutes reading time  23-Oct-20  How to contribute to COVID-19 research    8 minutes reading time  13-Oct-20  Tips to help your kids get used to face masks and coverings    6 minutes reading time  07-Oct-20  How does the new 90-minute COVID-19 test work?    6 minutes reading time  23-Sep-20  What are the long-term health impacts of coronavirus?    7 minutes reading time  23-Sep-20  Are we any closer to a coronavirus vaccine?    9 minutes reading time  22-Sep-20  What are the differences between colds, flu and COVID-19?    6 minutes reading time  09-Sep-20  How to reduce your risk of coronavirus on public transport    4 minutes reading time  19-Aug-20  How to make face masks and coverings more comfortable    6 minutes reading time  17-Jul-20  How to support loved ones in hospital during the coronavirus pandemic    7 minutes reading time  06-Jul-20  Why are Black and Asian people at greater risk from COVID-19?    7 minutes reading time  03-Jul-20  Are any coronavirus home remedies safe or effective?    6 minutes reading time  19-Jun-20  What are the latest rules on face masks in the UK?    5 minutes reading time  18-Jun-20  COVID-19: is it safe to send your kids back to school?    9 minutes reading time  18-Jun-20  Why lockdown is making us feel exhausted    8 minutes reading time  17-Jun-20  Coronavirus: why is outdoors safer than inside?    6 minutes reading time  15-Jun-20  Coping with grief during the coronavirus pandemic    7 minutes reading time  11-Jun-20  COVID-19 antibody tests: how do they work and who can get tested?    7 minutes reading time  05-Jun-20  How physiotherapy is helping coronavirus patients    7 minutes reading time  01-Jun-20  COVID-19: do I need to wash my shopping and groceries?    5 minutes reading time  22-May-20  Should you worry about your lockdown drinking habits?    7 minutes reading time  22-May-20  Vitamin D and coronavirus: is there evidence it can help?    6 minutes reading time  19-May-20  COVID-19: how to avoid burnout during the coronavirus pandemic    7 minutes reading time  18-May-20  Is coronavirus guidance different for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland?    6 minutes reading time  13-May-20  COVID-19: can I still get my prescription during the coronavirus lockdown?    6 minutes reading time  08-May-20  COVID-19: who can get tested for coronavirus under the new UK guidance?    5 minutes reading time  04-May-20  How to reduce your risk of DIY injuries during coronavirus lockdown    6 minutes reading time  01-May-20  COVID-19: will sticking to a routine help during coronavirus lockdown?    6 minutes reading time  30-Apr-20  COVID-19: do you need to wear a mask to avoid coronavirus?    8 minutes reading time  28-Apr-20  COVID-19: how to manage mood swings during coronavirus lockdown    6 minutes reading time  27-Apr-20  COVID-19: how does the coronavirus pandemic affect autistic people?    6 minutes reading time  24-Apr-20  COVID-19: how to talk to children about the coronavirus pandemic    5 minutes reading time  23-Apr-20  COVID-19 coronavirus: what to do if you're too ill to care for your children    5 minutes reading time  21-Apr-20  COVID-19: is handwashing still important when you're self-isolating?    4 minutes reading time  20-Apr-20  COVID-19: how to support vulnerable friends and family during the coronavirus pandemic    6 minutes reading time  20-Apr-20  COVID-19: can children become seriously ill from coronavirus?    5 minutes reading time  17-Apr-20  COVID-19: what to do if you feel suicidal during the coronavirus lockdown    6 minutes reading time  16-Apr-20  COVID-19: how to keep kids active during the coronavirus lockdown    5 minutes reading time  15-Apr-20  COVID-19: how you can contribute to the fight against coronavirus    7 minutes reading time  14-Apr-20  Coronavirus: how do we become immune to diseases like COVID-19?    7 minutes reading time  08-Apr-20  Is losing your sense of taste and smell a symptom of coronavirus?    6 minutes reading time  07-Apr-20  COVID-19: can I get tested for coronavirus?    8 minutes reading time  06-Apr-20  COVID-19 coronavirus: how to eat healthily from the cupboard and freezer     5 minutes reading time  03-Apr-20  Coronavirus: what are moderate, severe and critical COVID-19?    7 minutes reading time  01-Apr-20  COVID-19 coronavirus: when will we have a vaccine?    5 minutes reading time  30-Mar-20  COVID-19 coronavirus: what can I do under the new rules?    7 minutes reading time  27-Mar-20  COVID-19 coronavirus: what is an underlying health condition?    7 minutes reading time  25-Mar-20  COVID-19 coronavirus: what is shielding and who needs it?    7 minutes reading time  23-Mar-20  COVID-19: what you need to know about coronavirus and pregnancy    7 minutes reading time  23-Mar-20  COVID-19 coronavirus: what is social distancing?    7 minutes reading time  23-Mar-20  COVID-19: What is a risk group?    8 minutes reading time  20-Mar-20  COVID-19 coronavirus: do you need to disinfect your home?    5 minutes reading time  16-Mar-20  COVID-19: what should I do if I think I have coronavirus?    5 minutes reading time  11-Mar-20  COVID-19: how to protect yourself against coronavirus    5 minutes reading time  05-Mar-20  COVID-19: coronavirus myths debunked    8 minutes reading time  03-Mar-20  COVID-19 coronavirus: do I need to self-isolate?    7 minutes reading time  17-Feb-20  COVID-19: what happens next with the coronavirus outbreak?    7 minutes reading time  07-Feb-20  COVID-19: the latest UK coronavirus guidelines    4 minutes reading time  04-Feb-20  COVID-19: do you need to worry about coronavirus?    7 minutes reading time  27-Jan-20  COVID-19: what you need to know about coronavirus    6 minutes reading time  21-Jan-20Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Features      close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/chest-lungs/sars-and-mers-virus/featuresCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


