# Features | Healthy Eating | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search Healthy Eating   Features   Resources   Recipes On this page     Healthy EatingOn this page Features     Resources     Recipes    Features  The truth about the fat in your diet    6 minutes reading time  22-Feb-24  5 warming soup recipes     3 minutes reading time  22-Feb-24  How much water should you drink a day?    5 minutes reading time  21-Feb-24  What vitamins do I need?    7 minutes reading time  15-Feb-24  The best anti-ageing supplements for your health     7 minutes reading time  14-Feb-24  Why grow your own food for your health?    7 minutes reading time  13-Feb-24  7 cacao benefits: is raw chocolate best?     7 minutes reading time  13-Feb-24  Brain food: what to eat, when to eat, recipes    5 minutes reading time  13-Feb-24  Have a happy and healthy Ramadan     8 minutes reading time  09-Feb-24  Do gummy vitamins work?    5 minutes reading time  09-Feb-24  Healthy pancake recipes for your diet    5 minutes reading time  09-Feb-24  The best gut health foods - and why you need them     8 minutes reading time  08-Feb-24  Apple cider vinegar: Does it help with weight loss?    5 minutes reading time  26-Jan-24  Handy tips to reduce your food waste    7 minutes reading time  17-Jan-24  How to eat a calcium-rich vegetarian diet    5 minutes reading time  17-Jan-24  Why dessert stomach may actually be real     6 minutes reading time  15-Jan-24  5 easy vegan swaps for Veganuary 2024     6 minutes reading time  01-Jan-24  8 high-protein nuts to boost your strength    6 minutes reading time  18-Dec-23  10 trusted diets for your new year goals     7 minutes reading time  17-Dec-23  How to stop your sugar cravings    4 minutes reading time  17-Dec-23  Can psychology diet apps help you eat more mindfully?    5 minutes reading time  17-Dec-23  Why do we get sugar withdrawal symptoms?    3 minutes reading time  14-Dec-23  6 deliciously healthy berries and recipes     4 minutes reading time  13-Dec-23  A vegan diet improves heart health, according to a study of identical twins    4 minutes reading time  12-Dec-23  9 food swaps for a delicious and healthy Christmas dinner     6 minutes reading time  12-Dec-23  Healthy Hanukkah food for your weight, heart and diabetes     9 minutes reading time  01-Dec-23  Whole grain heroes: Why eat ancient grains?    5 minutes reading time  28-Nov-23  Why ultra-processed foods are so addictive - and how to cut down    4 minutes reading time  23-Nov-23  The longevity diet - can it add years to your life?     10 minutes reading time  23-Nov-23  The latest superfood - what's the fuss around microgreens?     5 minutes reading time  23-Nov-23  Feeling hangry? Why we get angry when we are hungry    4 minutes reading time  20-Nov-23  Which ultra-processed foods are safe - and which should we avoid?    5 minutes reading time  16-Nov-23  How to boost your energy levels and feel less tired in winter    6 minutes reading time  14-Nov-23  What is a low-carb diet and is it healthy?     6 minutes reading time  08-Nov-23  Juice: Is juicing fruits and vegetables good for us?    4 minutes reading time  08-Nov-23  9 benefits of chia seeds - and when they're not safe     6 minutes reading time  08-Nov-23  Ultra-processed foods: Are dairy-free milks like oat or soya good for us?    4 minutes reading time  02-Nov-23  What is the anti-inflammatory diet?     4 minutes reading time  02-Nov-23  How to comfort eat healthily in winter    5 minutes reading time  30-Oct-23  UK water quality part 2 – water pollution    7 minutes reading time  27-Oct-23  Is intermittent fasting a good way to lose weight?    6 minutes reading time  27-Oct-23  What is the BRAT diet and why is it unsafe?     5 minutes reading time  26-Oct-23  Have a healthy Diwali - food swaps and recipes    9 minutes reading time  25-Oct-23  Health benefits of garlic    4 minutes reading time  25-Oct-23  What's your ageotype: the four main ways we age     7 minutes reading time  23-Oct-23  Do Blue Zones hold the secrets to a longer life?     9 minutes reading time  19-Oct-23  UK water quality part 1 – is tap water safe?     6 minutes reading time  17-Oct-23  7 healthy Halloween treats     4 minutes reading time  16-Oct-23  7 vibrant autumn recipes - keep it seasonal    5 minutes reading time  12-Oct-23  How to follow a Mediterranean diet    5 minutes reading time  12-Oct-23  Kimchi and sauerkraut: What are the benefits of eating fermented foods?    5 minutes reading time  12-Oct-23  Can the MIND diet help keep our brains healthy?    5 minutes reading time  11-Oct-23  What are ultra processed foods and do they cause cancer?    5 minutes reading time  10-Oct-23  What is the TLC diet and can it improve your heart health?    7 minutes reading time  06-Oct-23  What is the Whole30 diet?     9 minutes reading time  29-Sep-23  Health-boosting ginger shots: fad or fact?     6 minutes reading time  29-Sep-23  8 benefits of matcha tea     7 minutes reading time  28-Sep-23  How to avoid ultra processed foods when you're vegan    4 minutes reading time  27-Sep-23  What is The Fast 800 diet?     8 minutes reading time  22-Sep-23  What are superfoods and do they really exist?    5 minutes reading time  21-Sep-23  Are artificial sweeteners really that bad for us?    5 minutes reading time  01-Sep-23  Healthy packed lunches and school meals    6 minutes reading time  31-Aug-23  Why too much sugar is bad for children    7 minutes reading time  30-Aug-23  How to gain weight healthily    6 minutes reading time  09-Aug-23  DASH diet - healthy eating that helps lower blood pressure     7 minutes reading time  28-Jul-23  Why keep a food diary?     8 minutes reading time  03-Jul-23  Can taurine supplements slow ageing?     5 minutes reading time  09-Jun-23  7 easy and delicious keto breakfast ideas     4 minutes reading time  01-Jun-23  What is the carnivore diet and is it healthy?     8 minutes reading time  11-May-23  Signs you’re not drinking enough water    5 minutes reading time  06-Apr-23  Managing health conditions during Ramadan     8 minutes reading time  22-Mar-23  What is the planetary health diet?     5 minutes reading time  27-Jan-23  New Year Resolutions: how to make environmentally friendly lifestyle changes    5 minutes reading time  02-Jan-23  Best before date: how long is food actually good for?    7 minutes reading time  29-Dec-22  How to make healthier choices without missing out    5 minutes reading time  19-Dec-22  Vitamin C: benefits, sources, and deficiency     5 minutes reading time  17-Nov-22  Coffee and lemon: fact-checking the TikTok trend     5 minutes reading time  03-Nov-22  7 easy and delicious noodle recipes for students    4 minutes reading time  24-Oct-22  What is the benefit of vitamin E?    4 minutes reading time  12-Oct-22  5 benefits of bees for your health      6 minutes reading time  27-Sep-22  What's the health impact of pesticides?     6 minutes reading time  26-Sep-22  Are pesticides harmful to humans?     8 minutes reading time  25-Sep-22  5 quick and healthy meals for students    3 minutes reading time  24-Sep-22  Why does my stomach bloat in hot weather?     6 minutes reading time  08-Sep-22  Pescatarian diet: pros, cons, and what you can eat     7 minutes reading time  02-Sep-22  Does aloe vera juice really help with gut health?    8 minutes reading time  18-Aug-22  7 light summer salad recipes for hot summer days    5 minutes reading time  16-Aug-22  Is drinking olive oil good for you?     5 minutes reading time  09-Aug-22  Our favourite summer recipes     5 minutes reading time  04-Aug-22  What's the difference between vegan and vegetarian diets?    9 minutes reading time  09-Jun-22  How to keep your child eating healthily at secondary school    9 minutes reading time  26-May-22  9 high-protein vegetarian meals to help you build muscle    5 minutes reading time  25-May-22  What's the recommended calorie intake for women?    7 minutes reading time  08-Apr-22  Biotin: do vitamins for hair growth really work?    4 minutes reading time  07-Mar-22  How to build muscle on a vegan diet    6 minutes reading time  01-Feb-22  What not to say to someone who is vegan    9 minutes reading time  18-Dec-21  How to snack healthily when you are vegan    4 minutes reading time  10-Dec-21  How much meat should we be eating?    5 minutes reading time  08-Dec-21  What are the health benefits of a vegan diet?    9 minutes reading time  07-Dec-21  How gut bacteria affect mood, focus and brain health     7 minutes reading time  29-Nov-21  Are fermented foods worth the hype?     5 minutes reading time  16-Aug-21  Dietitians, nutritionists and nutritional therapists: what is the difference?    5 minutes reading time  05-May-21  How to eat more healthily during the colder months    5 minutes reading time  25-Feb-21  What you need to know about unhealthy foods    5 minutes reading time  26-Jan-21  How to make small healthy changes to your diet without dieting    6 minutes reading time  11-Jan-21  How to help your kids eat healthily over Christmas    4 minutes reading time  24-Dec-20  Ways to improve your relationship with food    5 minutes reading time  19-Nov-20  How big is a portion?    7 minutes reading time  17-Jan-20  How to help children develop healthy habits    4 minutes reading time  02-Jan-20  How to have a healthy Christmas party    7 minutes reading time  19-Dec-19  How to eat well when it's hard to shop and cook     5 minutes reading time  18-Sep-19  Two soft drinks a day may increase risk of early death    2 minutes reading time  04-Sep-19  What happens to your body when you go vegan?    7 minutes reading time  20-Aug-19  Most vitamin supplements aren't beneficial for health, study finds    2 minutes reading time  09-Jul-19  Vitamin D could cut risk of dying from cancer     2 minutes reading time  04-Jun-19  The keto diet: is it safe and will it really help you lose weight?    4 minutes reading time  06-Mar-19  What is intuitive eating - and can it improve your relationship with food?    6 minutes reading time  01-Mar-19  What happens to your body after giving up caffeine?    7 minutes reading time  14-Feb-19  Does herbal medicine really work?    6 minutes reading time  12-Feb-19  Do you really need to give up sugar?    6 minutes reading time  15-Jan-19  Thinking about going vegan? Here's how to do it healthily     8 minutes reading time  03-Jan-19  How to eat healthily on a tight budget     7 minutes reading time  12-Nov-18  Is the food traffic light labelling system useful?    7 minutes reading time  04-Sep-18  The health benefits of coffee and tea    4 minutes reading time  21-Jul-18  Do you need to drink eight glasses of water a day?    3 minutes reading time  17-Apr-18  What are the benefits of a plant-based diet?    6 minutes reading time  01-Mar-18  Are carbs actually bad for you?    7 minutes reading time  06-Feb-18  What is inflammation and which foods reduce it?    5 minutes reading time  18-Jan-18  How to eat more vegetables without trying    7 minutes reading time  05-Jan-18  Patient's Christmas Cook Off     7 minutes reading time  14-Dec-17  How to make healthy stuffing    5 minutes reading time  13-Dec-17  How to make healthy mince pies    8 minutes reading time  13-Dec-17  How to make healthy roast potatoes     5 minutes reading time  13-Dec-17  What's the healthiest high street Christmas sandwich?    6 minutes reading time  04-Dec-17  How much red meat should you eat?    8 minutes reading time  17-Nov-17  Do omega-3 fish oil supplements have a proven health benefit?    5 minutes reading time  16-Nov-17  Does your body need vitamin supplements?    4 minutes reading time  08-Sep-17Resources  Low-fat diet sheetRecipes  Apricot and cranberry muffins    45min cooking time   Heritage carrots with black quinoa and aubergine yoghurt     20min cooking time   Chocolate orange porridge    5min cooking time      Spaghetti Bolognese for students     30min cooking time   Baby stuffed peppers with lemon and basil ricotta    35min cooking time      Smoky corn & avocado salsa    25min cooking time         Chargrilled monkfish kebabs    30min cooking time      Grilled mackerel & tomato bruschetta    30min cooking time    Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Features      close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/healthy-living/healthy-eating/featuresCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


