# Febrile Seizure (Febrile Convulsion): Causes and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Children's Health    Fever in Children (High Temperature)  Febrile Seizure Last updated by Dr Pippa Vincent   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 9 Jun 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Fever in Children (High Temperature) In this series     Fever in Children (High Temperature) A febrile seizure is a convulsion that occurs in some children with a high temperature (fever). The vast majority of febrile seizures are not serious. Most occur with mild common illnesses. Full recovery with no permanent damage is usual. The main treatment is aimed at the illness that caused the fever.In this article   What causes a febrile seizure?   Who has febrile seizures?   Febrile seizure symptoms   What first aid should I do for a febrile seizure?   What should happen after immediate first aid?   Is a febrile seizure dangerous?   Can febrile seizures be prevented?   Will it happen again?   Does a febrile seizure cause any permanent damage?   Is a febrile seizure a type of epilepsy?   Should a child who has had a febrile seizure have immunisations? In This Article     Febrile SeizureIn this article What causes a febrile seizure?  Who has febrile seizures?  Febrile seizure symptoms  What first aid should I do for a febrile seizure?  What should happen after immediate first aid?  Is a febrile seizure dangerous?  Can febrile seizures be prevented?  Will it happen again?  Does a febrile seizure cause any permanent damage?  Is a febrile seizure a type of epilepsy?  Should a child who has had a febrile seizure have immunisations? What causes a febrile seizure?A febrile seizure is sometimes called a febrile convulsion. Any illness that causes a high temperature (fever) can cause a febrile seizure. Most occur with common illnesses such as ear infections, tonsillitis, colds, flu and other viral infections. Serious infections, such as pneumonia, kidney infections, meningitis, etc, are much less common causes.Who has febrile seizures?Between 2 and 5 in 100 children have a febrile seizure sometime before their 6th birthday. They most commonly occur between the ages of 12 months and 18 months. They are rare in children aged under 3 months and over the age of 6 years.Febrile seizures are more common in children who have had a previous febrile seizure (3-5 out of 10 children who have had one febrile seizure will go on to have another one). They are also more common in children with a family history of febrile seizures (another family member having had them) or a family history of epilepsy. They are more common in children with a neurological condition such as cerebral palsy. They also seem to be more common in children who were born prematurely or those whose mothers smoked around the time of birth.Febrile seizures tend to occur when the temperature is above 38 degrees Celsius. However, they are not directly related to the height of the fever - they are no more likely to occur at 40 degrees Celsius in a child who is prone to them than they are at 38.1 degrees Celsius.82 out of 100 febrile seizures are caused by viral illnesses, particularly influenzae (the flu virus), rhinoviruses (a cold virus) and enteroviruses (the most common group of viruses which cause lots of minor illnesses such as hand, foot and mouth disease).11 out of 100 febrile seizures occur within 2 weeks of a vaccination. Fevers are common after vaccines in children. As most vaccines protect against illnesses that can also cause fever (and febrile seizures) as well as much more serious consequences, this is not a reason to avoid vaccination. Children prone to febrile seizures should still be vaccinated as normal. Our picks for Febrile Seizure Fever treatment for children: a doctor's adviceWe are in the season of snotty noses, coughs and a seemingly endless period of infections in chi...   6min  Fever treatment for children: a doctor's advice   6min  What parents need to know about school entry health checks   6min  When is your child too sick for school?   4min  How to keep your baby safe and warm in winter   7minFebrile seizure symptomsFebrile seizures are classified into three types:Simple febrile seizureThese are the most common type, and occur in about 15 out of 20 cases. They most often occur early in the illness when the child's temperature is starting to rise. Symptoms include:The child may look hot and flushed.Eyes may appear to roll backwards; they may appear dazed.The body may go stiff and twitch or shake (convulse).The child becomes unconscious and unresponsive.Some children may wet themselves during the febrile seizure.It does not usually last long. It may only be a few seconds and it is unusual for it to last more than five minutes. The child may be sleepy for some minutes afterwards.Within an hour or so the child will usually appear a lot better. This happens when their temperature has come down. Another feature of a simple febrile seizure is that it does not recur within 24 hours.Complex febrile seizureThis is less common and occurs in about 4 out of 20 cases. It is similar to a simple febrile seizure but has one or more of the following features:The seizure lasts more than 15 minutes; and/orThe seizure recurs within 24 hours; and/orThe child is not fully recovered within one hour. This does not mean the seizure lasts more than an hour but that it takes more than an hour for the child to look and behave more like their normal self; and/orThe seizure has focal (used to be called partial) features. This means that rather than a generalised twitch or shaking, only a part of the body may shake - for example, just one arm or just one leg.Febrile status epilepticusThis occurs in less than 1 out of 20 cases and means the febrile seizure lasts for longer than 30 minutes.What first aid should I do for a febrile seizure?Note the time it started.Cushion the child's head as best as possible with hands or soft material.Make sure there is nothing nearby that can cause harm or move the child away from anything that could cause harm.Do not put anything into their mouth or shake the child.When the seizure finishes, put the child into the recovery position.When the seizure stops, try to lower the child's temperature to make them more comfortable. To do this, take off their clothes (if the room is warm).When the child has recovered enough to swallow, give a drink and some paracetamol or ibuprofen.What should happen after immediate first aid?Call an ambulance if a seizure lasts more than five minutes (this includes small twitching movements, even if large jerking movements have stopped).When to see a doctorYou should also contact a doctor urgently if:This is the first time the child has had a seizure.The child is less than 18 months old.The child does not improve quickly once a short seizure is over.Another seizure starts soon after the first one stops.There are focal signs during the seizure (eg, one arm or leg jerking instead of the whole body).The child has difficulty breathing.The child was not fully conscious before the seizure or one hour afterwards.The child has recently taken antibiotics (these might mask symptoms of a more serious infection such as meningitis).You are worried the child may have a serious illness (such as meningitis) as the cause of the high temperature (fever). See the separate leaflet called Fever in Children (High Temperature) for details of symptoms to look out for.No treatment is needed for the seizure itself if it stops within five minutes. However, treatment may be needed for the infection causing the fever if it is a bacterial infection (82% of febrile seizures are caused by viral infections and do not need specific treatment).  Sometimes the seizure lasts longer than 5 minutes and an ambulance should be called. A healthcare professional may give a medicine to stop the seizure. For example, they may use a medicine called diazepam via the child's back passage (rectum) or a medicine called midazolam into the side of the mouth.These medicines are absorbed quickly, directly into the bloodstream, from within the rectum or mouth, and stop a seizure. Sometimes the parents of children who are prone to recurrent febrile seizures are taught how to use one of these medicines. They are then given a supply to have in case a further febrile seizure occurs.It is important to assess why a child has had the fever causing the febrile seizure. Often this is obvious as they have had a cold or flu like symptoms or are known to have an ear infection or urinary tract infection. If the cause is not obvious then investigations will need to be done in the emergency department which may include blood tests or x-rays (although these are not recommended routinely in febrile seizures as they are unlikely to change management). Although meningitis is an unusual cause of febrile seizures (as they are common and meningitis is uncommon), 1 in 4 children with meningitis will have a febrile seizure at the start of the illness - it is therefore important to rule this out in children where the cause is otherwise unclear. A test called a lumbar puncture (where fluid is removed from the spine and tested) may be recommended if:A healthcare professional thinks there are signs of meningitis.A child is between 6 and 18 months of age and has not had the Hib vaccine to protect against meningitis.A child has febrile status epilepticus.A child under 12 months of age has a complex febrile seizure.Is a febrile seizure dangerous?Although alarming, a febrile seizure in itself is not usually dangerous. Full recovery is usual. Most illnesses which cause high temperature (fever) and febrile convulsions are the common coughs, colds and viral infections which are not usually serious.Can febrile seizures be prevented?It may seem logical that keeping a child's temperature down during a feverish illness it may prevent a febrile seizure. However, there is little scientific evidence to prove that this is so.However, a fever may make a child feel uncomfortable and irritable. The following are things that can be done to help bring the temperature down and make a child feel more comfortable:Give paracetamol (or ibuprofen if the child is over 6 months) to lower a temperature. paracetamol can be bought in liquid form, or melt-in-the-mouth tablets, for children. It comes in various brand names. The dose for each age is given with the medicine packet. Note: paracetamol does not treat the cause of the fever. It merely helps to ease discomfort. The fever will usually recur when the medication is wearing off. Paracetamol does not need to be used if the child is comfortable and not distressed by the fever, aches or pains.Keep the child very lightly dressed, or take all their clothes off if the room is warm.Give lots of cool drinks.Will it happen again?Only one seizure occurs in most cases. However, a second seizure may occur during a future feverish illness in 3-5 out of 10 children. A future febrile seizure is more likely if the first occurs in a child younger than 15 months, or if there is a family history of febrile seizures in close relatives (father, mother, sister, brother).Does a febrile seizure cause any permanent damage?Full recovery is usual with no after-effects. One study that followed children who had a febrile seizure found that: "Children who had febrile seizures did at least as well as, if not better than, children without febrile seizures on measures of intelligence, academic achievement, behaviour and working memory."Is a febrile seizure a type of epilepsy?No. Febrile seizures and epilepsy are two different conditions.The cause of a febrile seizure is related to the feverish illness and is not due to epilepsy or any brain abnormality.Epilepsy causes seizures without a high temperature (fever). There is a separate set of leaflets explaining epilepsy in more detail.About 2 in 100 children who have a febrile seizure develop epilepsy in later childhood. This is very slightly higher than the chance of epilepsy developing in children who have not had a febrile seizure. This is thought to be due to a small number of children being prone to develop both epilepsy and febrile seizures. Having the febrile seizure does not cause the epilepsy but a child who is going to develop epilepsy may be more likely to have febrile seizures.New studies suggest that children with febrile seizures are more likely to have differences in genes relating to fever response as well as in several genes affecting brain cell responses, including some genes commonly found in people with epilepsy.Should a child who has had a febrile seizure have immunisations?Yes. Immunisations are very important for your child's health.Previous article   Fever in Children (High Temperature)Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Fever in under 5s: assessment and initial management; NICE Guidance (last updated November 2021)Offringa M, Newton R, Cozijnsen MA, et al; Prophylactic drug management for febrile seizures in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Feb 222:CD003031. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003031.pub3.Febrile seizure; NICE CKS, November 2018 (UK access only)Sawires R, Buttery J, Fahey M; A Review of Febrile Seizures: Recent Advances in Understanding of Febrile Seizure Pathophysiology and Commonly Implicated Viral Triggers. Front Pediatr. 2022 Jan 139:801321. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.801321. eCollection 2021.Eilbert W, Chan C; Febrile seizures: A review. J Am Coll Emerg Physicians Open. 2022 Aug 233(4):e12769. doi: 10.1002/emp2.12769. eCollection 2022 Aug.Genome-wide association study of febrile seizures implicates fever response and neuronal excitability genes; BrainRelated InformationFebrile Convulsions ProFever in Children (High Temperature)Types of Epilepsy and SeizuresParacetamol (Calpol, Disprol, Panadol)Ear Infection (Otitis Media)  Fever treatment for children: a doctor's advice    6 minutes reading time  24-Feb-23  What parents need to know about school entry health checks    6 minutes reading time  02-Sep-19  When is your child too sick for school?    4 minutes reading time  22-Nov-18  How to keep your baby safe and warm in winter    7 minutes reading time  21-Dec-17  What are some alternative treatments?   bradley22626Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Pippa Vincent Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  4246 (v43)  Last updated on   09 June 2023 Next review date  12 May 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Fever in Children (High Temperature)Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Febrile Seizure (Febrile Convulsion): Causes and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/childrens-health/fever-in-children-high-temperature/febrile-seizure-febrile-convulsionCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


