# Gallstones | Symptoms, Causes and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Digestive Health  Gallstones and Bile Last updated by Dr Hayley Willacy   Peer reviewed by Dr Laurence Knott  Last updated 28 Jun 2021         Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Cholecystitis      Acute Pancreatitis      ERCP In this series     Cholecystitis      Acute Pancreatitis      ERCP Gallstones are common but cause no symptoms in two out of three people who have them. They sometimes cause pain, yellowing of your skin or the whites of the eyes (jaundice), inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis) and gallbladder inflammation. Surgery is the usual treatment for gallstones that cause symptoms.In this article   What are gallstones?   Symptoms of gallstones   How are gallstones diagnosed?   Gallstones treatment   After a gallbladder is removed   Post-cholecystectomy syndrome   Understanding the gallbladder and bile In This Article     Gallstones and BileIn this article What are gallstones?  Symptoms of gallstones  How are gallstones diagnosed?  Gallstones treatment  After a gallbladder is removed  Post-cholecystectomy syndrome  Understanding the gallbladder and bile What are gallstones?Gallstones occur when bile, which is normally fluid, forms stones. Gallstones commonly contain lumps of fatty (cholesterol-like) material that has solidified and hardened. Sometimes bile pigments or calcium deposits form gallstones. Sometimes just a few small stones are formed; sometimes a great many. Occasionally, just one large stone is formed.Human gallstonesGeorge Chernilevsky, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia CommonsBy George Chernilevsky, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia CommonsAbout one in three women, and one in six men, form gallstones at some stage in their lives. Gallstones become more common with increasing age. The risk of forming gallstones increases with pregnancy, obesity, rapid weight loss, having a close relative with gallstones, and diabetes, and if you take certain medicines such as the contraceptive pill.You can find out more about the gallbladder and bile in the Further Reading section at the end of this leaflet. Our picks for Gallstones and Bile Gallstones diet sheetGallstones occur when bile, which is normally fluid, forms stones in your gallbladder. This is t...  Gallstones diet sheet  Could it be gallstones?   4min  Summer crunch salad   10min  Can you get gallstones when you're young?   4minSymptoms of gallstonesCommonly they cause no problemsMost people with gallstones do not know they have them. It is common to have stones in the gallbladder that cause no symptoms. Gallstones are often found when the tummy (abdomen) is scanned or X-rayed for other reasons.Possible problemsAbout one out of three people with gallstones develop symptoms or problems. Symptoms are more likely to develop in smokers and women who have had a lot of children. Symptoms include:Biliary colic. This is a severe pain in the upper abdomen. The pain is usually worst to the right-hand side, just below the ribs. It is caused by a stone that becomes stuck in the cystic duct. This is the small tube that takes bile from the gallbladder to the bile duct. The gallbladder then squeezes (contracts) hard to dislodge the stone and this causes pain. The pain eases and goes if the gallstone is pushed out into the bile duct (and then usually out into the gut), or if it falls back into the gallbladder.Pain from biliary colic can last just a few minutes but, more commonly, lasts for several hours. A severe pain may only happen once in your lifetime, or it may flare up from time to time. Sometimes less severe but niggly pains occur now and then, particularly after a fatty meal when the gallbladder contracts most.Inflammation of the gallbladder. This is called cholecystitis. This can lead to infection in the gallbladder. Symptoms usually develop quickly and include abdominal pain, high temperature (fever) and being generally unwell. You will normally be admitted to hospital and have your gallbladder removed soon if you develop this problem. See the separate leaflet called Cholecystitis which provides more details.Jaundice. This is an uncommon complication of gallstones. It occurs if a gallstone comes out of the gallbladder but gets stuck in the bile duct. Bile then cannot pass into the gut and so seeps into the bloodstream. This causes yellowing of your skin or the whites of the eyes (jaundice). The stone may eventually be passed into the gut. However, it is common to need an operation to remove a gallstone which has become stuck in the bile duct. (Note: there are many other causes of jaundice apart from gallstones.) See the separate leaflet called Jaundice which provides more details.Blockage illustrationBruceBlaus, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia CommonsBy BruceBlaus, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia CommonsPancreatitis. This is an inflammation of the pancreas. The pancreas makes a fluid rich in enzymes (chemicals which digest food):The pancreatic fluid travels down the pancreatic duct. The pancreatic duct and bile duct join together just before opening into the first part of the gut known as the duodenum. If a gallstone becomes stuck here it can cause pancreatitis which is a painful and serious condition. See the separate leaflet called Acute Pancreatitis which provides more details.Other complications. These occasionally occur, such as severe infection of the bile duct, obstruction of the bowel and other uncommon gut problems.See the separate article called Could it be gallstones?Want to see a dietician?Book a private assessment with a qualified dietician today. Book now How are gallstones diagnosed?In many cases your symptoms, combined with tenderness in the upper right side of your tummy (abdomen), will alert the doctor that this is likely to be gallstones. However, tests are sometimes needed to rule out other conditions such as stomach ulcers, irritable bowel syndrome and tumours. An ultrasound scan and blood tests are the most common investigations done. Other investigations including different types of scans may sometimes be required.Gallstones treatmentNo treatment is needed in most casesIt is often best to leave gallstones alone if they cause few or no symptoms. If symptoms are problematic after fatty food, it makes sense to avoid that type of food. For more details, see the leaflet called Gallstones diet sheet.MedicationOnce gallstones start giving symptoms, surgery is the best treatment. However, you may be given painkillers and antibiotic medication through a drip if the gallbladder becomes infected. Surgery is performed once the infection settles down - usually a week later.Taking a medicine called ursodeoxycholic acid may sometimes dissolve small stones. This may take years of treatment, is not usually successful and is therefore not commonly used. However, it may be used to prevent gallstones developing when there is a high risk of them forming. For example, it may be used in people who lose weight rapidly following surgery for obesity.SurgeryAn operation to remove the gallbladder is the usual treatment if you have troublesome symptoms caused by gallstones. Different techniques to remove the gallbladder may be recommended depending on its site, size and other factors.Keyhole surgery is now the most common way to remove a gallbladder. The medical term for this operation is laparoscopic cholecystectomy. It is called keyhole surgery, as only small cuts are needed in the tummy (abdomen) with small scars remaining afterwards. The operation is done with the aid of a special telescope that is pushed into the abdomen through one small cut. This allows the surgeon to see the gallbladder. Instruments pushed through another small cut are used to cut out and remove the gallbladder. Keyhole surgery is not suitable for all people.Some people with gallstones need a traditional operation to remove the gallbladder. This is called cholecystectomy. In this operation a larger cut is needed to get at the gallbladder.Other surgical procedures may be needed if a stone becomes stuck in the bile duct.Editor's noteDr Sarah Jarvis, 5th July 2021Laser treatment to break up bile duct stonesA procedure called laser lithotripsy can be used to break up stones in the bile duct. This is usually carried out under general anaesthetic using endoscopy - a flexible telescope inserted through the mouth. A laser fibre is inserted gently through the flexible telescope and used to break the stones into smaller pieces, which can be more easily removed.The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has looked at the evidence for this treatment. They recommend that it should only be considered for difficult-to-treat bile duct stones, with special arrangements for monitoring. This is because it has been found to be effective, but at the moment there is limited evidence about its long-term safety.You can find out more about this procedure, and NICE's recommendations, from the further reading section at the end of this leaflet.After a gallbladder is removedYou do not need a gallbladder to digest food. Bile still flows from the liver to the gut once the gallbladder is removed. However, there is no longer any storage area for bile between meals. The flow of bile is therefore constant, without the surges of bile that occur from a gallbladder when you eat a meal.You can usually eat a normal diet without any problems after your gallbladder is removed, although some patients are advised to eat a low-fat diet. Up to half of people who have had their gallbladder removed have some mild tummy (abdominal) pain or bloating from time to time. This may be more noticeable after eating a fatty meal. Some people notice an increase in the frequency of passing stools (faeces) after their gallbladder is removed. This is like mild diarrhoea. It can be treated by antidiarrhoeal medication if it becomes troublesome.Post-cholecystectomy syndromeWhilst it is unusual to have problems following gallbladder removal, some patients develop problems including tummy (abdominal) pain, yellowing of their skin or the whites of the eyes (jaundice) or indigestion symptoms.Understanding the gallbladder and bileBile is a fluid made in the liver. Bile contains various substances, including bile pigments, bile salts, cholesterol and lecithin. Bile is passed into tiny tubes called bile ducts. The bile ducts join together (like the branches of a tree) to form the main bile duct. Bile constantly drips down the bile ducts, into the main bile duct and then into the gut.The gallbladder lies under the liver on the right side of the upper tummy (abdomen). It is like a pouch which comes off the main bile duct and fills with bile. It is a 'reservoir' which stores bile. The gallbladder squeezes (contracts) when we eat. This empties the stored bile back into the main bile duct. The bile passes along the remainder of the bile duct into the first part of the gut, known as the duodenum.Bile helps to digest food, particularly fatty foods. Next article  Cholecystitis  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines on the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of gallstones; European Association for the Study of the Liver (2016)Gallstone disease; NICE Clinical Guideline (October 2014)Cholecystitis - acute; NICE CKS, January 2017 (UK access only)Gutt C, Schlafer S, Lammert F; The Treatment of Gallstone Disease. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2020 Feb 28117(9):148-158. doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2020.0148.Laser lithotripsy for difficult-to-treat bile duct stones; NICE Interventional procedures guidance, June 2021Related InformationGallstones and Cholecystitis ProCholecystitisERCP (Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography)Ursodeoxycholic acid (Ursofalk, Cholurso)Ursodiol (Actigall, Urso)  Gallstones diet sheet  Could it be gallstones?    4 minutes reading time  22-Feb-23  Summer crunch salad    10min cooking time   Can you get gallstones when you're young?    4 minutes reading time  09-Oct-17  Hello I was wondering if anyone noticed a strange bump above the belly button after the gallbladder removal. When I look at the mirror sideways I see a bump I know I did not have before. I thought it...   carolina68962Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Hayley Willacy Peer reviewed by  Dr Laurence Knott Document ID  4251 (v43)  Last updated on   28 June 2021 Next review date  27 June 2026 Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Next article Cholecystitis Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Gallstones      close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/digestive-health/gallstones-and-bileCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


