# Gonorrhoea: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Sexual Health    Sexually Transmitted Infections (STI, STD)  Gonorrhoea Last updated by Dr Hayley Willacy   Peer reviewed by Dr Toni Hazell  Last updated 29 Mar 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Sexually Transmitted Infections (STI, STD)      Genital Warts (Anogenital Warts)      Genital Herpes      Male Urethritis      Trichomoniasis      Mycoplasma Genitalium (Mgen) In this series     Sexually Transmitted Infections (STI, STD)      Genital Warts (Anogenital Warts)      Genital Herpes      Male Urethritis      Trichomoniasis      Mycoplasma Genitalium (Mgen) Gonorrhoea is a sexually transmitted infection caused by a germ (bacterium). It can be treated with antibiotics. Treatment is important to prevent complications.In this article   What is gonorrhoea?   What causes gonorrhoea?   Gonorrhoea symptoms   Gonorrhoea test   Gonorrhoea complications   Gonorrhoea treatment   Gonorrhoea prevention In This Article     GonorrhoeaIn this article What is gonorrhoea?  What causes gonorrhoea?  Gonorrhoea symptoms  Gonorrhoea test  Gonorrhoea complications  Gonorrhoea treatment  Gonorrhoea prevention Female genitalsWhat is gonorrhoea?What is gonorrhoea?Dr Rosemary Leonard MBE, MRCGPGonorrhoea is an infection affecting mainly the genital areas. It can also affect the throat and eyes. Very occasionally the infection can spread to other parts of the body. Gonorrhoea accounts for 9 out of every 100 sexually transmitted infections (STIs) diagnosed in sexual health clinics in England. There were 57,084 cases in England in 2020. One in three of those cases were in young people aged 15-24 years.What causes gonorrhoea?How do you contract gonorrhoea?Dr Rosemary Leonard MBE, MRCGPGonorrhoea is caused by the germ (a bacterium) Neisseria gonorrhoeae. It is passed on if you have:Unprotected vaginal, oral or anal sex with an infected person.Shared sex toys that have not been washed or covered with a new condom during use.As gonorrhoea can be transmitted vaginally, anally and orally, it can therefore be passed during sex between men and women or sex between men and men.In men, the infection usually affects the urethra (the tube between the bladder and the end of the penis) but can cause infection of the mouth or anus of both sexes. Vaginal liquid can be a source of infection so in theory it could be passed on during sex between women but this is very uncommon.The bacterium that causes gonorrhoea cannot survive outside the human body for long. Therefore it is not spread by using communal swimming pools, public toilets, sharing baths, towels and cutlery, or hugging and kissing.Gonorrhoea symptomsSymptoms of gonorrhoea in womenFemale genitalsThere are no symptoms in about half of women who have infection with gonorrhoea.About 1 in 2 women develop an increase or change in vaginal discharge.About 1 in 4 women develop pain in the lower part of the stomach.Rarely, women may notice bleeding between periods, or heavy periods.Pain when passing urine can sometimes mimic a urine infection.There may be pain when having sex in some women.Infection of the back passage (rectum) or throat (pharynx) can develop. Such infections do not usually cause symptoms, although occasionally rectal itching or a sore throat may be noticed.Symptoms of gonorrhoea in menInfection of the urethra (urethritis) is the typical infection in men. This commonly develops 5-7 days after having sex with an affected person. Symptoms include:Discharge from the penis. This may stain underpants. It occurs in at least 8 out of 10 men with the infection.Pain or burning sensation when passing urine. This occurs in about half of cases.Irritation inside the penis, or a feeling of wanting to pass urine frequently.Redness at the opening of the urethra at the end of the penis.Infection of the back passage (rectum) or throat (pharynx) can develop. Such infections do not usually cause symptoms, although occasionally rectal pain, discharge or itching or a sore throat may be noticed.Gonorrhoea is believed to cause symptoms in most infected men (about 9 in 10 affected). However, about 1 in 2 women with gonorrhoea do not have any symptoms.The symptoms may clear over time, even without treatment. This may take up to six months but can be just a couple of weeks or so. However, without treatment, some germs (bacteria) usually remain in the urethra. It is just that the symptoms may go.Note: even if symptoms go or are not present, there is a good chance that you can pass on the infection if you do not have treatment.Get tested todaySexual health blood and urine profiles now available in Patient Access Book now Gonorrhoea testIt is important to get tested and treated If you suspect that you have gonorrhoea or any other STI. You will need your diagnostic test to be done in a specialist genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic, so if you think you have gonorrhoea you should make an appointment at your local genitourinary medicine GUM clinic. If you are not sure you can see your GP first, but they will need you to be seen at the clinic for proper diagnosis. In the UK you can go to the local GUM clinic without a referral from your GP. You can ring your GP surgery, local hospital or health authority and ask where the nearest clinic is. Local and national information is also available on the internet - for example, see Further Reading for the 'Find a sexual health clinic service'. You will normally be advised to have tests if gonorrhoea is suspected - even if symptoms go. Ideally you should attend a local GUM clinic for this.What happens during a gonorrhoea test?A urine sample and/or a sample (swab) of the discharge will be taken to try to identify the germ (bacterium) that causes gonorrhoea. A urine test is not as accurate in women as it is in men. If a swab is taken for a man, it will be taken from the inside end of the penis (the urethra).In women, a swab is taken from high up in the vagina. Another swab is taken from the inside the neck of the womb (the endocervix) at the womb's entrance. You will also be advised to have tests for other STIs. It will also be suggested that any sexual partners attend for tests and/or treatment.Gonorrhoea complicationsWhat are the long-term effects of gonorrhoea?Dr Rosemary Leonard MBE, MRCGPComplications of gonorrhoea in womenInfection can spread to the womb (uterus) to cause pelvic inflammatory disease. This can cause long-standing (chronic) pelvic pain and can lead to infertility.Pregnancy can be complicated by premature labour, ectopic pregnancy or miscarriage.Infection present during pregnancy can lead to infection spreading to the eyes of a newborn baby. This is called ophthalmia neonatorum.Pelvic infection can spread to the liver.Abscesses can develop in the Bartholin's glands on either side of the lower part of the vaginal opening.Rarely, there can be spread in the bloodstream to other parts of the body.Complications of gonorrhoea in menIn a small number of cases the infection travels up the urethra to the prostate gland. It may also cause infection of the testicles or the tubes around them (epididymo-orchitis).Rarely, a narrowing (stricture) of the urethra may develop.It can affect future fertility.Men who have sex with men can get infections of the back passage (anus) and throat.Rarely, there can be spread in the bloodstream to other parts of the body.Gonorrhoea treatmentThe usual treatment is a single injection of an antibiotic medicine plus a single large dose of a different antibiotic taken by mouth. However, sometimes other treatment regimes and schedules are used. For example, if you have an allergy to the usual antibiotic, or if you have another infection at the same time. Symptoms of gonorrhoea usually start to improve within a few days.Previous successful treatment for gonorrhoea does not prevent you from catching it again.Does my sexual partner need treatment?Yes. Sexually active men and women should be tested for infection, even if they have no symptoms. Treatment with antibiotics is usually advised for sexual partners, even if the tests are negative, because:Germs (bacteria) that cause gonorrhoea are often passed on during sex. Tests for bacteria are not foolproof. Treatment with antibiotics helps to make sure that any possible infection is cleared.If a sexual partner is infected and not treated, infection can be passed back to you.If you have gonorrhoea without symptoms then you may have had it for some time. In this situation any sexual partners within the previous three months should be tested and treated.Treatment follow-upA doctor or healthcare professional will normally want to know that treatment has worked. It is usual to be reviewed soon after you finish treatment. This is to check that symptoms have gone and to do a test to check that the infection has gone. Sometimes further treatment (perhaps with a different antibiotic) is needed if the infection has persisted despite treatment.You should not have sex until both you and your sexual partner have finished treatment. Note: this will normally be for at least seven days after treatment has commenced. Even if the treatment is the usual one-dose schedule of two antibiotics as described above, it takes several days for the infection to clear after taking the treatment.Gonorrhoea preventionWearing a condom during sex (including anal sex and oral sex) helps to prevent the spread of STIs.The risk of STIs increases with the number of changes of sexual partner. So, the fewer partners you have, the lower your risk of STIs.Previous article   Genital Herpes Next article  Male Urethritis  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  2018 UK national guideline for the management of infection with Neisseria gonorrhoeae; British Association for Sexual Health and HIV (BASHH) - 2018: reviewed 2020Gonorrhoea; NICE CKS, August 2022 (UK access only)Gonorrhoea: guidance, data and analysis; GOV.UKSexually transmitted infections (STIs): surveillance, data, screening and management; UK Health Security Agency (Last updated February 2020)Find a sexual health clinic near you; NHS servicesRelated InformationGonorrhoea ProSexually Transmitted Infections (STI, STD)Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) ProUrethral StricturePelvic Inflammatory Disease  Can you live a long, healthy life with HIV?    8 minutes reading time  30-Nov-23  HIV in women: what you should know     6 minutes reading time  30-Nov-23       Video: What are the different types of STI?  Is it easy to have an HIV test?    5 minutes reading time  27-Nov-23  I have been driving myself crazy trying to figure this out. I'm also super itchy. Not sure if it's from hair or dry skin. I'm having a mental health crisis over this. No insurance at the moment.   roxie06258Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Hayley Willacy Peer reviewed by  Dr Toni Hazell Document ID  4490 (v44)  Last updated on   29 March 2023 Next review date  27 March 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Genital HerpesNext article Male Urethritis Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Gonorrhoea: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/sexual-health/sexually-transmitted-infections-leaflet/gonorrhoeaCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


