# Guttate Psoriasis: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Skincare and Conditions    Psoriasis  Guttate Psoriasis Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP   Authored by Dr Oliver Starr, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP   Last updated 13 Oct 2022   Originally published 8 Jul 2017   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Psoriasis      Psoriatic Arthritis      Nail Psoriasis (Psoriatic Nail Disease) In this series     Psoriasis      Psoriatic Arthritis      Nail Psoriasis (Psoriatic Nail Disease) Guttate psoriasis is a skin condition which gives you light red, scaly patches scattered over almost your whole body. It often happens a few weeks after a throat infection with a particular germ (bacterium) called a group A beta-haemolytic streptococcus.In this article   What is guttate psoriasis?   What causes guttate psoriasis?   What does guttate psoriasis look like?   Does guttate psoriasis make you feel ill?   Who is affected by guttate psoriasis?   How is guttate psoriasis diagnosed?   Can guttate psoriasis be confused with anything else?   How to treat guttate psoriasis   What's the outlook like after having guttate psoriasis?   What happens after the first outbreak? In This Article     Guttate PsoriasisIn this article What is guttate psoriasis?  What causes guttate psoriasis?  What does guttate psoriasis look like?  Does guttate psoriasis make you feel ill?  Who is affected by guttate psoriasis?  How is guttate psoriasis diagnosed?  Can guttate psoriasis be confused with anything else?  How to treat guttate psoriasis  What's the outlook like after having guttate psoriasis?  What happens after the first outbreak? What is guttate psoriasis?Although it has the name 'psoriasis', guttate psoriasis is almost a completely different condition to the usual psoriasis. It is a skin condition that comes on quickly, usually a few weeks after a throat infection. Some medications can also cause it.What causes guttate psoriasis?For some reason a group A beta-haemolytic streptococcus infection, which can cause a really sore throat, sometimes causes a skin reaction.It's thought to be caused by your immune system going into 'overdrive' and accidentally reacting to your own skin.The throat infection is found in about 80% of cases.No one can quite figure out why this happens but some people seem to be more prone to it than others. It might be to do with your genetic make-up.In this way it's similar to the way a throat infection can lead to rheumatic fever.Can anything else cause guttate psoriasis?Rarely some medications can cause guttate psoriasis, particularly lithium (used for mental health problems) and beta-blockers (used in heart conditions).What does guttate psoriasis look like?The word 'gutta' means 'drop' in Latin so that's where the name guttate psoriasis comes from: it can look like tiny pink drops have been scattered on the person's body. They are usually slightly raised, with a thin white scale. They don't hurt, but they can be a bit itchy.Guttate psoriasis handsMohammad2018, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia CommonsBy Mohammad2018, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia CommonsThe above image shows guttate psoriasis on the back of someone's hands:The spots come on pretty quickly, over just a day or two.They usually cover the chest, tummy, upper arms and thighs.Usually the palms of the hands and soles of the feet are not affected.It only occasionally affects your head and face.They are slightly raised, light pink skin marks that might have a white scale to their surface.Does guttate psoriasis make you feel ill?Usually the appearance of the spots is the worst thing about it.It doesn't usually make you feel ill or feverish.The spots are not usually painful, but they can be a tiny bit itchy (only a little bit though).You can imagine that coming up in spots all over your body in just a few days can be pretty distressing: a lot of people are quite upset when they see their doctor.Suffer from dermatitis?Book a private appointment with a local pharmacist today to discover treatment options Book now Who is affected by guttate psoriasis?Usually young people get guttate psoriasis, in their teens or twenties. Men and women are affected equally.It seems to occur all over the world.No one really quite knows how common it is. In general, a GP in the UK would have heard of it and probably know how to diagnose it, but they may not have seen a case themselves for many years.How is guttate psoriasis diagnosed?There aren't any particular tests for guttate psoriasis.It's diagnosed by the way it looks and also by finding out if there has been a throat infection a few weeks before. Occasionally a blood test can be used to detect the streptococcus germ (bacterium): this is called an anti-streptolysin antibody assay.A skin biopsy is not usually needed. If it isn't quite clear what the skin condition is, a specialist skin doctor (dermatologist) might use a small microscope (a dermatoscope) to look at it more closely.Can guttate psoriasis be confused with anything else?There are other conditions that give similar skin problems.Pityriasis rosea can look a bit like guttate psoriasis, but doesn't follow a throat infection.Pityriasis lichenoides can resemble guttate psoriasis, but again doesn't follow a throat infection. And the lesions look a bit different to guttate psoriasis.See also the separate leaflet on Skin Rashes.How to treat guttate psoriasisThe good news is, guttate psoriasis typically fades by itself within a few weeks to a few months.It doesn't necessarily need treating unless it's really bothering the person. No particular treatment option has been shown to work better than others.A GP may prescribe a mild steroid cream if the lesions are itchy - although in practice it is quite hard to spread cream over such a large area of the body. It is worth nourishing the skin with simple moisturisers.Although it is related to a bacterial throat infection, giving antibiotics doesn't actually speed up the spots going away.A dermatologist may use 'light therapy' which is where they beam UV light at you in a special box (a bit like tanning!). This is a specialised treatment that isn't available in all hospitals. It can help to clear up the guttate psoriasis a bit quicker than otherwise.What's the outlook like after having guttate psoriasis?In nearly two thirds of people with guttate psoriasis, the spots clear up and never come back.Occasionally the spots turn into a more long-term type of psoriasis called plaque psoriasis. This can be treated with similar creams and light treatment.Once it's cleared, sometimes (but not very often) a second outbreak of guttate psoriasis happens. This could happen if the streptococcus bug is lurking in your tonsils.Thankfully the guttate psoriasis never properly scars, although sometimes it can leave tiny pale marks where it used to be: these should fade with time though.What happens after the first outbreak?Usually it comes and goes and then that's all there is to it. In about 80% of people the spots will fade in three weeks to three months and never come back. But in some people it carries on to be long-term plaque psoriasis. Sometimes you can get a second outbreak, particularly if the streptococcus germ (bacterium) is still in your throat or tonsils.Previous article   Psoriasis Next article  Psoriatic Arthritis  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Guttate Psoriasis; Primary Care Dermatology Society.Guttate psoriasis; DermNetPsoriasis; NICE CKS, September 2022 (UK access only)Maruani A, Samimi M, Stembridge N, et al; Non-antistreptococcal interventions for acute guttate psoriasis or an acute guttate flare of chronic psoriasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Apr 84:CD011541. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD011541.pub2.Related InformationGuttate Psoriasis (Causes, Symptoms and Treatment) ProCalcitriol ointment for psoriasis (Silkis)Psoriatic ArthritisPsoriasisMometasone for severe inflammatory skin conditions (Elocon)  Dry skin in winter: what cold weather can do to your skin    7 minutes reading time  08-Dec-23  Eczema, psoriasis, and ringworm: what's the difference?    7 minutes reading time  11-Aug-23  What causes psoriasis?    7 minutes reading time  27-Apr-23  What are the symptoms of psoriasis?    9 minutes reading time  27-Apr-23  I'd been prescribed Butrans pain patches to help transfer from one Biological therapy to another (Enbrel to Cimzia) by my Rheumatologist. I cannot tolerate co-codamol or tramdol - I vomit. My kidneys...   OkapisJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Authored by   Dr Oliver Starr, MRCGP  Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP Document ID  29412 (v2)  Originally published on   08 July 2017  Last updated on   13 October 2022 Next review date  12 October 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  PsoriasisNext article Psoriatic Arthritis Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Guttate Psoriasis: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/skin-conditions/psoriasis-leaflet/guttate-psoriasisCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


