# Heart Disease: Symptoms, Types, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Heart Health and Blood Vessels  Heart Disease Last updated by Dr Rachel Hudson   Peer reviewed by Dr Pippa Vincent  Last updated 10 Jan 2024   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Congenital Heart Disease In this series     Congenital Heart Disease The heart is a muscle pump located in the chest, which pumps blood around the body. It keeps pumping from a few weeks after conception until we die. There are a number of different conditions that can affect how the heart works. In this article   What is heart disease?   Heart disease symptoms   What causes heart disease?   Types of heart disease   How is heart disease diagnosed?   What is the treatment for heart disease?   Preventing coronary heart disease In This Article     Heart DiseaseIn this article What is heart disease?  Heart disease symptoms  What causes heart disease?  Types of heart disease  How is heart disease diagnosed?  What is the treatment for heart disease?  Preventing coronary heart disease What is heart disease?There are many different conditions which can affect the heart, including those which affect the heart valves, the heart wall muscle, the blood supply to the heart, and the electrical currents within the heart.Heart disease symptomsThese include:Chest pain (the most well-known symptom of heart disease).Central crushing chest pain (the typical pain which is caused by angina or a heart attack).Heavy aching in the left arm or in the neck or jaw.Breathlessness and tiredness can occur as not enough blood is getting pumped around the body to meet all its needs.Dizziness or a feeling of palpitations (this is common with heart rate or heart rhythm problems).Fluid build up, resulting in swelling of the feet/legs and breathlessness due to fluid in the lungs.A heart attack also generally makes people feel sweaty, breathless and extremely unwell. Our picks for Heart Disease Why the heart disease gender gap is costing women their livesCoronary heart disease is a major cause of death among women worldwide, but it is often seen as ...   5min  Why the heart disease gender gap is costing women their lives   5min  What is the most common cause of sudden cardiac death?   6min  How to manage stress when living with cardiomyopathy   4min  Anatomy of the heart and blood vesselsWhat causes heart disease?The causes vary, depending on the type of heart disease. These can include problems with the structure of the heart from birth, faulty genes, and lifestyle factors such as smoking, being overweight, an unhealthy diet, lack of exercise, alcohol and various drugs.Types of heart diseaseCoronary heart diseaseThis is what most people mean when they talk about heart disease. Coronary heart disease affects the coronary arteries, which are the blood vessels which supply the heart muscle. Sometimes it is called ischaemic heart disease. Ischaemic means blocked blood supply.In coronary heart disease, the arteries can become furred up with atheroma. Atheroma is made up of fatty deposits that form on the inside of blood vessels, which mean that blood does not flow normally through them.Coronary heart disease includes:Angina.Coronary artery spasm.Acute coronary syndrome, which includes a heart attack (myocardial infarction).Congenital heart diseaseSome babies are born with problems in their hearts. This is one of the things that the doctor will check your baby for in the baby checks shortly after birth, and again when the baby is about 8 weeks of age.Many heart problems are picked up on ultrasound scans done before birth. Heart murmurs are quite common in babies and young children and do not always indicate that there is a problem with the heart.Because a murmur is caused by turbulence in flow through the heart valves, if the heart is beating fast (perhaps because the baby is unwell with a high temperature) then that can cause a flow murmur which disappears once the child is well and the heart is beating at a normal speed again.However, murmurs can be caused by the heart not developing properly before birth. Sometimes a hole remains in the wall (septum) between the left and right side of the heart. This can be either:A ventricular septal defect; orAn atrial septal defect.Coarctation of the aorta is a condition in which the main artery that leaves the heart, the aorta, is narrowed so that blood does not flow properly around the body.Tetralogy of Fallot is a condition which is often diagnosed before the baby is born, during an antenatal scan.Tetralogy means 'four' and there are four heart abnormalities associated with this condition:Ventricular septal defectOverriding aorta (where the aorta sits over the ventricular septal defect rather than over the ventricle)Obstruction to blood flow from the right ventricleSwelling of the right ventricle.Surgical repair is the usual treatment.Valvular heart diseaseSee the separate leaflet called Heart Valves and Valve Disease.Heart rhythm problemsSee the separate leaflet called Abnormal Heart Rhythms (Arrhythmias).CardiomyopathyCardiomyopathies are diseases that affect the heart muscle. There are several types:Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Dilated cardiomyopathy.Restrictive cardiomyopathy: this is a rare form of cardiomyopathy in which the heart muscle is not able to relax completely between heartbeats.Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy: this is rare and only affects the right side of the heart.Heart failureSee the separate leaflet called Congestive Heart Failure.How is heart disease diagnosed?If your doctor suspects you have a problem with your heart they will arrange some investigations.Physical examinationThe doctor will check your blood pressure and listen to your heart. Looking at other areas of the body as well may give them other clues about what is going on.Blood testsYour doctor may arrange for you to have some blood tests. These may:Check for anaemia which can make you feel breathless (full blood count).Check your cholesterol level (lipids).Check for diabetes (blood glucose or HbA1c).Check for heart failure (B natriuretic peptide, or BNP).ElectrocardiogramA heart tracing (electrocardiogram, or ECG)looks at the electrical signals keeping your heart beating. This may be done by the practice nurse at your surgery or you may need to go to the hospital to have it done.If you are experiencing the sensation of having a 'thumping' heart (palpitations) and your doctor suspects that your heart rhythm is sometimes irregular, they may want to arrange a 24-hour ECG.EchocardiogramIf you have a heart murmur or if your doctor suspects heart failure, they may arrange for you to have an ultrasound scan of your heart (echocardiogram, or 'echo'). This looks at how the blood is flowing through the valves and the different chambers of the heart.Specialist investigations for coronary heart diseaseThe cardiologist may organise a CT (computed tomography) scan to show whether the coronary arteries are narrowed or blocked by atheroma, after an injection of dye into a vein.Another type of scan which can be done is a myocardial perfusion scan. A small amount of radioactive substance is used to check blood flow to the heart muscle.They may also arrange a more invasive test called a coronary angiogram. A small tube called a cardiac catheter is inserted through the skin and passed through the blood vessels until it comes to the heart.Then dye which can be seen on X-rays can be put into the blood vessels supplying the heart muscle. The cardiologist will then be able to see if any of the arteries are narrowed or blocked by atheroma.If narrowing or blockage is found then they may be able to proceed straight away to a procedure to open up the artery. Angioplasty is a procedure in which a small balloon is passed through the cardiac catheter to the place where the artery is narrowed.Then it is inflated in the blood vessel to open it up. A wire mesh tube called a stent may be left in the artery to keep it open.What is the treatment for heart disease?Again, treatments vary depending on the type of heart disease. Treatments include the following:MedicationMedicines are used to:Thin the blood and prevent blood clots forming in the heart and elsewhere in the body (eg, aspirin, clopidogrel, warfarin, apixaban)Improve blood flow to the heart (eg, nicorandil, ranolazine, ramipril)Slow down the heart rate if it is beating too fast (eg, bisoprolol, verapamil, ivabradine, flecainide)Open up the blood vessels in the heart to improve blood flow to the heart muscle (eg, GTN spray, isosorbide mononitrate)Reduce fluid build up in heart failure (eg, furosemide, bumetanide)SurgeryThis can range from less invasive procedures such as angioplasty to clear blockages (see above) and pacemaker fitting to control abnormal heart rates and rhythms, to major open surgery such as heart bypass surgery for coronary heart disease, heart valve repair or replacements for valve disease, and even heart transplants for some conditions.Preventing coronary heart diseaseThere are a number of factors which make it more likely that you will have angina or a heart attack. These include:High blood pressure (hypertension).Raised cholesterol.Diabetes.Smoking.Being overweight.Family history of heart disease, particularly at a young age.Inactivity, or a sedentary lifestyle.Following a Mediterranean diet based on eating lots of fruit, vegetables and grains, and lower amounts of red meat and processed foods, has been shown to reduce the risk of heart disease.Your doctor may offer you a screening test for some of these risk factors and you may be offered medication to reduce the risk of having a heart attack. See the separate leaflet called Cardiovascular Health Risk Assessment. Next article  Congenital Heart Disease  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Acute coronary syndromes; NICE Guidance (November 2020)Acute coronary syndromes (including myocardial infarction) in adults; NICE Quality Standard, September 2014 - last updated November 2020Gelb BD; History of Our Understanding of the Causes of Congenital Heart Disease. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015 Jun8(3):529-36. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.115.001058.Heart failure - chronic; NICE CKS, January 2023 (UK access only)Related InformationAnatomy of the heart and blood vesselsHeart Attack (Myocardial Infarction)High CholesterolAcute Myocardial Infarction ProPET Scan  Why the heart disease gender gap is costing women their lives    5 minutes reading time  14-Nov-22  What is the most common cause of sudden cardiac death?    6 minutes reading time  16-Dec-21  Lentil, chickpea and spinach curry    25min cooking time      Artificial intelligence could detect irregular heartbeats     2 minutes reading time  02-Aug-19  Every now and then I get this weird feeling in the left side of my chest which can last anywhere from 1min to 45mins+. During the duration of the episode, whenever I exhale or inhale beyond a certain...   jake55266Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Rachel Hudson Peer reviewed by  Dr Pippa Vincent Document ID  29484 (v3)  Last updated on   10 January 2024 Next review date  08 January 2029 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Next article Congenital Heart Disease Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Heart Disease: Symptoms, Types, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/heart-health/heart-diseaseCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


