# Heart Valve Disease (Causes, Symptoms and Treatment) | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Heart Health and Blood Vessels  Heart Valve Disease Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy   Peer reviewed by Dr Laurence Knott  Last updated 20 Dec 2021   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Mitral Stenosis      Mitral Regurgitation      Aortic Stenosis      Aortic Regurgitation      Infective Endocarditis In this series     Mitral Stenosis      Mitral Regurgitation      Aortic Stenosis      Aortic Regurgitation      Infective Endocarditis There are four common types of heart valve problem - mitral stenosis, mitral regurgitation, aortic stenosis and aortic regurgitation. See the leaflet called Anatomy of the heart. This includes details about the function of the heart and how the heart beats.In this article   What is heart valve disease?   What are the symptoms of heart valve disease?   What causes heart valve disease?   What are the possible complications?   How are heart valve problems diagnosed?   What is the treatment for heart valve disease? In This Article     Heart Valve DiseaseIn this article What is heart valve disease?  What are the symptoms of heart valve disease?  What causes heart valve disease?  What are the possible complications?  How are heart valve problems diagnosed?  What is the treatment for heart valve disease? Normal heart detail Our picks for Heart Valve Disease Anatomy of the heart and blood vesselsThe heart is a muscular pump that pushes blood through blood vessels around the body. The heart ...  Anatomy of the heart and blood vessels  Celebrities and their heart problems   4min  Anatomy of the heart and blood vesselsWhat is heart valve disease?A heart valve that is diseased or damaged can affect the flow of blood through the heart. There are two main types of heart valve problem:Heart valve stenosis. This means that the opening of the heart valve is narrowed and the valve does not open fully. So, there is some restriction in blood flow through the valve.Heart valve regurgitation (sometimes called heart valve incompetence, or a leaky valve). This means that the valve does not close properly and there is backflow of blood through the leaky valve.Any of the heart valves can be affected by these problems. However, the mitral and aortic valves are the ones that most commonly become diseased. Read more in our separate leaflets on mitral stenosis, mitral regurgitation, aortic stenosis and aortic regurgitation.What are the symptoms of heart valve disease?Heart valve disease symptoms may include:Shortness of breath. This tends to occur on exercise at first but occurs at rest if the stenosis becomes worse. This symptom is due to the congestion of blood and fluid in the lungs.Fainting, dizziness or tiredness. If the amount of blood getting through to the ventricle is reduced, the output of blood from the left ventricle to the body is then reduced.Chest pains (angina). This may develop if there is a reduced blood flow to the arteries that take blood to the heart muscle (the coronary arteries).Fast or irregular heartbeat which you may feel as the sensation of a 'thumping heart' (palpitations).Chest infections may happen more often.Coughing up bloodstained sputum. This may occur due to the congestion of blood and fluid in the lungs.The liver may be swollen and you may develop a swollen stomach due to fluid.People with mitral stenosis may get flushed cheeks.If rheumatic fever is the cause then symptoms often start between the ages of 20 and 50 years. (That is, 10-20 years after having have had an episode of rheumatic fever as a child.)What causes heart valve disease?Degenerative changesThis is one of the most common causes of leaky heart valves. The structures supporting the heart valves weaken and stretch over time and this prevents the valves from closing properly.Rheumatic heart diseaseRheumatic heart disease is a general term which means any heart problem which develops after having an episode of rheumatic fever.Rheumatic fever is a condition which sometimes follows an infection with a germ (bacterium) called the streptococcus. Your body makes antibodies to the bacterium to clear the infection. But, in some people, the antibodies also attack various parts of the body - in particular, the heart valves. Inflammation of one or more valves may develop which can cause permanent damage and lead to thickening and scarring years later.Rheumatic fever used to be common in the UK in the era before antibiotics but it is now rare. It is still quite common in some developing countries.Other causes of heart valve diseaseOther causes of heart valve disease include:Deposits of calcium (calcification) in parts of the valve. This is the most common cause of aortic stenosis in older people.Dilated cardiomyopathy.Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Some heart problems present from birth (congenital). It is then usually part of a complex heart deformity.Infection of the valve (infective endocarditis).A leaky heart valve may occasionally occur following heart valve surgery.A complication of various uncommon diseases.What are the possible complications?Various complications may develop, depending on the valve affected and the severity of the problem.The main possible complications that may develop include the following:Atrial fibrillation develops in about 4 in 10 cases. In this condition, the heart beats in a fast and irregular way. This occurs because the electrical signals in the enlarged atrium become faulty. The irregular heart rhythm can cause the sensation of a 'thumping heart' (palpitations) and make you even more breathless. See the separate leaflet called Atrial Fibrillation.Heart failure may develop and gradually become more severe. This causes worsening shortness of breath, tiredness, and fluid retention in various tissues of the body. See the separate leaflet called Congestive Heart Failure.Stroke. A blood clot may form within the enlarged left atrium, which does not fully empty into the ventricle with each heartbeat. A blood clot is more likely to occur if you also develop atrial fibrillation. A blood clot may travel through the heart, be carried in the bloodstream and get stuck and block a blood vessel in another part of the body. For example, it may get stuck in a blood vessel going to the brain and cause a stroke. See the separate leaflet called Stroke.Endocarditis sometimes develops. This is an infection of the valve. (Damaged valves are more prone than normal valves are to infection.) Unless promptly treated, endocarditis can cause serious illness. See the separate leaflet called Infective Endocarditis.How are heart valve problems diagnosed?A doctor may hear a heart murmur or other abnormal noises when listening with a stethoscope. Murmurs and noises are due to blood passing through abnormal heart valves, or to abnormal movement of valves. There are typical murmurs and noises which occur with each heart valve problem.Initial tests usually include a chest X-ray and a heart tracing (an electrocardiogram, or ECG).An ultrasound scan of the heart (an echocardiogram, or 'echo') can confirm the diagnosis.Other heart tests, including computerised tomography (CT) scans and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans can help to assess the severity of the condition.Cardiac catheterisation may be done to assess the severity of the heart valve problem. In this test a thin tube called a catheter is inserted into either the main blood vessel in the top of the leg (femoral artery) or an artery in the wrist (radial artery). It is passed up to the heart. A small device on the tip of the catheter can measure the pressure on either side of the heart valve.What is the treatment for heart valve disease?Any treatment will depend on which valve is affected and the severity of the heart valve problem. Learn more about the treatments for mitral stenosis, mitral regurgitation, aortic stenosis and aortic regurgitation.MedicationMild cases may not require any regular medication. Some medicines may be prescribed to help ease symptoms, or to help prevent complications. For example:Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are medicines which help to reduce the amount of work the heart does. One may be prescribed to ease symptoms of heart failure.'Water' tablets (diuretics) usually help if you are breathless. They make the kidneys produce more urine. This gets rid of excess blood and fluid which may build up in the lungs or other parts of the body with the back pressure from the heart.If you develop atrial fibrillation, several medicines can be used to slow the heart rate down. They include beta-blockers, calcium-channel blockers and digoxin. Shocking the heart with an electrical current (a procedure called cardioversion) is also an option in some people who develop atrial fibrillation as a complication.Anticoagulation medication is usually advised if you develop atrial fibrillation. This helps to prevent blood clots from forming.SurgerySurgery to stretch, repair or replace the heart valve may be needed in some cases. Surgical treatment has greatly improved the outlook for many cases of severe valve disease. Surgery has a very good success rate. Next article  Mitral Stenosis  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Heart valve disease presenting in adults: investigation and management; NICE guideline (November 2021)2023 ESC Guidelines for the management of infective endocarditis; European Society of Cardiology (Aug 2023)Prophylaxis against infective endocarditis: Antimicrobial prophylaxis against infective endocarditis in adults and children undergoing interventional procedures; NICE Clinical Guideline (March 2008 - last updated July 2016)Guidelines for the management of valvular heart disease; European Society of Cardiology (2021)Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al; 2020 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Management of Patients With Valvular Heart Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021 Feb 277(4):e25-e197. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2020.11.018. Epub 2020 Dec 17.Related InformationAnatomy of the heart and blood vesselsMitral StenosisAortic StenosisMitral RegurgitationAortic Regurgitation  Anatomy of the heart and blood vessels  Celebrities and their heart problems    4 minutes reading time  21-Sep-17  Every now and then I get this weird feeling in the left side of my chest which can last anywhere from 1min to 45mins+. During the duration of the episode, whenever I exhale or inhale beyond a certain...   jake55266Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy Peer reviewed by  Dr Laurence Knott Document ID  4723 (v46)  Last updated on   20 December 2021 Next review date  19 December 2026 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Next article Mitral Stenosis Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Heart Valve Disease (Causes, Symptoms and Treatment)     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/heart-health/heart-valves-and-valve-diseaseCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


