# Hereditary Spherocytosis: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Digestive Health    Spleen Pain  Hereditary Spherocytosis Last updated by Dr Doug McKechnie   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy  Last updated 2 Jan 2024   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Spleen Pain      Preventing Infection after Splenectomy In this series     Spleen Pain      Preventing Infection after Splenectomy Hereditary spherocytosis (HS) is an inherited condition of red blood cells. The disease can be mild and go unrecognised in some people. In others there may be severe anaemia requiring regular blood transfusions.Some people with hereditary spherocytosis may be offered surgery to remove their spleen. This usually helps the condition, but increases their risk of developing severe infections.In this article   What is hereditary spherocytosis?   How common is hereditary spherocytosis?   What are the features of hereditary spherocytosis?   How is hereditary spherocytosis inherited?   How is hereditary spherocytosis diagnosed?   Hereditary spherocytosis treatment   Hereditary spherocytosis complications   What is the outlook (prognosis) for hereditary spherocytosis? In This Article     Hereditary SpherocytosisIn this article What is hereditary spherocytosis?  How common is hereditary spherocytosis?  What are the features of hereditary spherocytosis?  How is hereditary spherocytosis inherited?  How is hereditary spherocytosis diagnosed?  Hereditary spherocytosis treatment  Hereditary spherocytosis complications  What is the outlook (prognosis) for hereditary spherocytosis? What is hereditary spherocytosis?Hereditary spherocytosis (HS) is an inherited condition that affects your red blood cells. The red blood cells are those that carry oxygen around the body. Their shape (like a slightly elongated saucer) helps them carry oxygen effectively.In HS there is a defect in the outer layer of the red blood cell. This means the cell is not the usual shape. Spherocytosis means more sphere-shaped and this also makes it more fragile than usual.How common is hereditary spherocytosis?In the USA and Europe, HS is found in about 1 in 2,000 people. There are many different types of defect but they all produce similar problems.What are the features of hereditary spherocytosis?The features of hereditary spherocytosis are usually: Anaemia.Yellowing of your skin and of the whites of your eyes (jaundice).A large spleen.These features can happen at any time of life.Anaemia means that you have fewer red blood cells than normal, or you have less haemoglobin than normal in each red blood cell. Anaemia can make you feel tired and short of breath with little or no exercise.Jaundice can occur for many different reasons. For example, a common reason for jaundice is because the liver isn't working properly.In hereditary spherocytosis you become jaundiced because your red cells are broken down too quickly. As they are broken down, the red cells release a coloured substance - a pigment. The body cannot clear it away quickly enough and it shows in your skin and eyes.In hereditary spherocytosis the spleen has to work harder than usual. This means the spleen grows and becomes larger than normal.How severe is hereditary spherocytosis?As regards severity:About 2-3 in 10 people with HS have mild disease. They will be losing red blood cells but their body will be able to replace them quickly. They may have no symptoms.About 6-7 in 10 people with HS have moderate or severe disease. Half of these are first diagnosed in childhood with anaemia.Want to see a dietician?Book a private assessment with a qualified dietician today. Book now How is hereditary spherocytosis inherited?Hereditary spherocytosis can be inherited in three different ways, depending on the exact type of HS present.Autosomal dominantThis means that you can inherit HS from just one of your parents. If one of your parents has a faulty copy of the gene, there is a 50:50 chance that each child they have will inherit the faulty gene and develop HS. This is the most common way to inherit HS. About 7 out of 10 cases are inherited this way.Autosomal recessiveThis means that, in order to develop HS, you need to inherit two abnormal genes - one from your mother and one from your father. If you inherit only one abnormal gene, you are called a carrier. Carriers do not have the disorder, as they have one normal gene which is enough to make normal-shaped red blood cells. However, carriers can pass the abnormal gene on to their children.New mutationOccasionally, however, someone with HS may not have a history of the condition in their family. This may be because of what is called a new mutation, or a de novo mutation. A new mutation is a fault in a gene that is present for the first time in one family member. It can happen because of:A fault in the genetic material in either the egg or sperm of one of the affected person's parents; orA fault in the genetic material of the fertilised egg when the egg and sperm meet (the embryo).It is not clear what causes this mutation suddenly to occur for the first time.If you are diagnosed as having HS, it might be useful to see a genetic counsellor. They can advise you about the specific risks of passing on your type of HS if you have children.How is hereditary spherocytosis diagnosed?The changes in the red blood cell can be seen through a microscope. They will be noticed if a blood sample is sent to the laboratory. Another cell (a reticulocyte) may also be seen. This shows that the red blood cells are being broken down too quickly.Other blood tests are sometimes needed. They help to rule out other causes of red blood cell changes, such as liver disease, zinc toxicity and some infections.Your doctor may also notice that your spleen is larger than usual, if they examine your tummy (abdomen).Hereditary spherocytosis treatmentTreatment for hereditary spherocytosis typically include:No treatment (for mild cases).Blood transfusions if there is severe anaemia.Folate tablets (or liquid for small children) - these are also given to help the body to keep replacing the red blood cells. A normal diet will not meet the increased demand for folate.Removing the spleen.Medicines such as steroids may reduce the need for transfusions in a crisis - see below.Removing the spleenRemoving the spleen (splenectomy) is known to help control the disease. The blood cells are able to survive for much longer in the bloodstream if the spleen is removed. The decision to do this is not straightforward though. Removing the spleen means the risk of a life-threatening infection is increased for that person.After a splenectomy, people with hereditary spherocytosis will require lifelong preventative antibiotics - such as low-dose penicillin or erythromycin. It may also be sensible for them to have a full treatment dose of antibiotics at home, in case an infection develops. This will mean treatment will start as soon as possible and not depend, for example, on pharmacy opening hours.People with HS who have had their spleen removed will also require vaccinating against various infections.Because of these risks, the person with HS will need to understand how to recognise that an infection is developing. Carrying a card or wearing a special medical emergency bracelet or similar that explains the person has had a splenectomy, is also sensible.Research is showing that just removing part of the spleen may also be effective. More evidence is needed.Hereditary spherocytosis complicationsGallstonesGallstones are often found in people who have HS. The gallbladder is often removed at the same time as the spleen, if you also have symptoms of gallstones. Gallstones usually cause pain under the ribs on the right side after a fatty meal.Worsening of symptomsA sudden worsening of symptoms can occur which doctors call a crisis. In HS a crisis can cause yellowing of your skin or the whites of your eyes (jaundice), anaemia and a tender spleen very quickly.They can be triggered by viral infections such as colds and flu. Painkillers and plenty of fluids (possibly given through the vein) are usually all that is needed.One particular infection - parvovirus B19 - may suppress the bone marrow. This can be life-threatening and usually lasts for 10-14 days. A crisis can also be caused by a lack of folate.What is the outlook (prognosis) for hereditary spherocytosis?Most children have mild disease and do not need removal of the spleen (splenectomy). They have a normal life expectancy. If the spleen is removed, the red blood cells will survive for much longer and fewer transfusions are then needed. However, there is an increased risk of life-threatening infections.Previous article   Preventing Infection after SplenectomyAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of hereditary spherocytosis; British Committee for Standards in Haematology - archived content (September 2011)Perrotta S, Gallagher PG, Mohandas N; Hereditary spherocytosis. Lancet. 2008 Oct 18372(9647):1411-26.Spherocytosis, Type 1, SPH1; Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)Related InformationHereditary Spherocytosis ProJaundiceSickle Cell Disease (Sickle Cell Anaemia)Folic acid (folate - FolicA, FoliSol, Lexpec)Sickle Cell Disease and Sickle Cell Anaemia Pro  6 months ago i saw a Rheumatologist who diagnosed me with Polymyalgia Rheumatica, whilst doing the blood test he came across a paroprotein in my blood which the lab had said was too small to...   carol25143Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Doug McKechnie Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy Document ID  13821 (v4)  Last updated on   02 January 2024 Next review date  06 November 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Preventing Infection after SplenectomyHealth informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Hereditary Spherocytosis: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/digestive-health/spleen-pain/hereditary-spherocytosisCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


