# High Blood Pressure (Hypertension): Symptoms and Causes | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Heart Health and Blood Vessels  High Blood Pressure Hypertension Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP   Last updated 13 Nov 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Living with High Blood Pressure      Blood Pressure Medication      Thiazide Diuretics In this series     Living with High Blood Pressure      Blood Pressure Medication      Thiazide Diuretics High blood pressure (hypertension) happens when the force on the walls of blood vessels (caused by the blood within them) is more than normal. This means the heart has to work harder and the blood vessels are under more strain, making it a major risk factor for heart disease, stroke and other serious conditions.In this article   What is high blood pressure?   High blood pressure symptoms   How is high blood pressure diagnosed?   Why is high blood pressure a problem?   What causes high blood pressure?   How is blood pressure measured?   What tests are done for high blood pressure?   How to reduce high blood pressure   Treatments for high blood pressure In This Article     High Blood PressureHypertensionIn this article What is high blood pressure?  High blood pressure symptoms  How is high blood pressure diagnosed?  Why is high blood pressure a problem?  What causes high blood pressure?  How is blood pressure measured?  What tests are done for high blood pressure?  How to reduce high blood pressure  Treatments for high blood pressure What is high blood pressure?Dr Yassir Javaid, MRCGP Our picks for High Blood Pressure (Hypertension) Cheese could protect blood vessels from damage caused by high-salt dietUS researchers found cheese can help protect blood vessels against damage done by sodium, accord...   3min  Cheese could protect blood vessels from damage caused by high-salt diet   3min  High blood pressure in mid-30s could shrink your brain   2min       Video: How to reduce blood pressure  Are UK blood pressure levels on the rise?   6minWhat is high blood pressure?High blood pressure (hypertension) is a blood pressure that is 140/90 mm Hg or above each time it is taken at the GP surgery, or home or ambulatory readings where the average is more than 135/85 mm Hg. That is, it is sustained at this level.The higher number is called the systolic blood pressure and the lower number is the diastolic blood pressure. The ideal blood pressure is between 90/60mmHg and 120/80mmHg.High blood pressure is only diagnosed if there are several blood pressure readings that are high, taken on different occasions, and when a person is relaxed.What is blood pressure?Blood pressure reading will have two figures, one 'over' the other - for example, 140/80. The higher figure (called the systolic level) is a measure of the pressure inside the arteries when the heart is pumping blood out.The lower figure (called the diastolic level) is a measure of the pressure inside the arteries when the heart is resting between heartbeats. Blood pressure is measured in millimetres of mercury (mm Hg).A one-off blood pressure reading that is high does not mean high blood pressure. Blood pressure varies throughout the day. It may be high for a short time, such as when anxious, stressed, or after exercise.High blood pressure symptomsThe vast majority of people with high blood pressure do not know they have it, until it causes a complication such as a stroke or heart attack. Usually high blood pressure is only picked up if blood pressure is checked routinely, or as part of checks for another medical problem.Occasionally, symptoms of high blood pressure may include:Headaches.Dizziness.Affected vision.Changes in the blood vessels at the back of the eye.Other than the blood pressure reading being high, there isn't usually anything for the doctor to find on examination either. If blood pressure has been high for some time, or very high, there can be changes in the blood vessels at the back of the eye.How is high blood pressure diagnosed?Unless a single level is extremely high, high blood pressure will not be diagnosed without an average of several readings, usually from home or ambulatory measurements. Blood pressure recording outside of the doctor's surgery is recommended in most people who are suspected of having high blood pressure.One reason for this is because some people become anxious in medical clinics. This can cause the blood pressure to rise. (This is often called white coat hypertension.) Home or ambulatory monitoring of blood pressure may show that the blood pressure is normal when a person is relaxed.However, if a person has diabetes, or has recently had a heart attack or stroke, blood pressure checks may be advised more often over the following week or so. Treatment with medication is usually considered at an earlier stage if the high blood pressure readings remain high. Video Playlist High Blood Pressure Q&AWhat is considered high blood pressure? How serious is high blood pressure? What can you do to lower your blood pressure? Can you test your blood pressure at home? All your questions answered. Watch Now Why is high blood pressure a problem?High blood pressure (hypertension) is a risk factor for developing serious health problems sometime in the future. High blood pressure over a long period of time may do some damage to the blood vessels (arteries) and put a strain on the heart. In general, the higher the blood pressure, the greater the health risk.Cardiovascular disease is the biggest risk from having high blood pressure. Cardiovascular diseases are diseases of the heart (cardiac muscle) or blood vessels (vasculature). This usually means diseases of the heart or blood vessels that are caused by atheroma.Patches of atheroma are like small fatty lumps that develop within the inside lining of blood vessels (arteries). Atheroma is also known as atherosclerosis and hardening of the arteries.Cardiovascular diseases that can be caused by atheroma include:Angina.Heart attack.Stroke.Transient ischaemic attack (TIA).Peripheral arterial disease.What causes high blood pressure?It isn't always clear what might be causing high blood pressure. However, the risk of developing high blood pressure is increased if a person:Has diabetes. This is the case for type 1 diabetes but it is even more common in those with type 2 diabetes.Is of African-Caribbean origin.Is from the Indian subcontinent.Has a family history of high blood pressure.Has certain lifestyle factors. That is, those who:Are overweight.Eat a lot of salt.Aren't physically active.Drink a lot of alcohol.Have a lot of stress.How is blood pressure measured?The first blood pressure reading will usually be in a clinic or GP's surgery. If one reading is found to be high, it is usual for the doctor or nurse to advise a time of observation. This means several blood pressure checks at intervals over time.These checks will often include home or ambulatory readings. The length of the observation period varies depending on the initial reading and whether there are any other risk factors for cardiovascular disease.Clinic/GP surgery blood pressure readingsThese are readings taken by a doctor or nurse in a clinic or a GP surgery, using a standard blood pressure machine.Home blood pressure readingsThis involves a machine to take blood pressure readings at home. Blood pressure readings are taken by a person whilst seated and at rest at home, using a standard blood pressure machine. The blood pressure readings are taken twice a day for a week. This can then provide an average reading. It's normal for blood pressure to fluctuate, so a single raised reading isn't a cause for concern unless it's extremely high.Ambulatory blood pressure readingsThese are readings taken at regular intervals during normal activities. A small machine that is attached to the arm takes and records the readings, usually over a 24-hour period.As a rule, an average of the ambulatory blood pressure readings gives the truest account of blood pressure. Home blood pressure readings are a good substitute if an ambulatory machine is not available.Ambulatory and home readings are often a bit lower than clinic or GP surgery readings. Sometimes they are a lot lower. This is because people are often much more relaxed and less stressed at home than in a formal clinic or surgery situation.See the separate leaflet called Home and Ambulatory Blood Pressure Recording.What tests are done for high blood pressure?Anyone who is diagnosed as having high blood pressure (hypertension) will need to be examined by a doctor and have some routine tests which include:A urine test to check for protein or blood in the urine.A blood test to check that the kidneys are working normally and to check cholesterol level and sugar (glucose) level.A heart tracing, called an electrocardiogram (ECG).The purpose of the examination and tests is to:Rule out (or diagnose) a secondary cause of high blood pressure, such as kidney disease.Check to see if the high blood pressure has affected the heart.Check for other risk factors such as a high cholesterol level or diabetes.How to reduce high blood pressureLifestyle changes can be very important to help reduce blood pressure and reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease. In some people diagnosed with high blood pressure, this may help them to avoid medication. In particular, the following may help:Losing weight if overweight.Maintaining alcohol intake to within recommended limits.Reducing the salt in the diet.Taking regular exercise.Stopping smoking doesn't reduce blood pressure, but smoking and high blood pressure increase the risk of the same conditions. So quitting smoking will reduce the risk of conditions such as strokes, heart attacks, peripheral arterial disease and chronic kidney disease.See the separate leaflet called Living with High Blood Pressure.Treatments for high blood pressureHigh blood pressure medicationThe main treatment for high blood pressure is medication. There are many different medicines for high blood pressure. There are six main classes of medicines that are used to lower blood pressure:Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs).Calcium-channel blockers.Thiazide diuretics.Beta-blockers.Alpha blockers.They work in various different ways. A doctor will advise on the best one to use for any individual as the most effective medicine will depend on age and ethnic group. If the first medicine doesn't work well enough or causes side effects, there are plenty of other options. More than one medicine is often needed to control high blood pressure.The idea is to find one or more pills which suit an individual, and which control blood pressure. Once blood pressure is controlled, medication needs to be continued long-term. Blood pressure will be checked regularly and medication adjusted if need be.It is recommended by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) that medication to help control high blood pressure should be used in addition to lifestyle advice for persistent stage 2 hypertension (clinic blood pressure measured as 160/100 mm Hg or higher but less than 180/120 mm Hg and home or ambulatory blood pressure average of 150/95 mm Hg or higher).Medication may also be advised for anyone aged under 80 with persistent stage 1 hypertension (clinic blood pressure between 140/90 mm Hg and 159/99 mm Hg and home or ambulatory blood pressure average of 135/85 mm Hg to 149/94 mm Hg) if it is found that the high blood pressure has caused any damage, such as to the eyes, heart or kidneys, or if there is known cardiovascular disease, kidney disease, diabetes.Medication may be considered in addition to lifestyle advice for those aged under 60 with stage 1 hypertension. Medication may also be considered in addition to lifestyle advice for those aged over 80 with stage 1 hypertension if the clinic blood pressure is over 150/90 mm Hg.If a person has 'grade 1 hypertension' (clinic blood pressure 140/90 mm Hg to 159/99 mm Hg and subsequent ABPM daytime average or HBPM average blood pressure 135/85 mm Hg to 149/94 mm Hg), the 10-year risk of heart attack or stroke will be calculated. This takes into account several factors including age, gender, cholesterol levels and other medical conditions, as well as blood pressure.NICE recommends starting treatment if the 10-year risk is over 10%. That means many more people may be offered tablets to protect them against heart attack and stroke. Next article  Living with High Blood Pressure  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management; NICE (August 2019 - last updated November 2023)2021 European Guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical practice; European Society of Cardiology (2021)Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension; ESH/ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines, European Society of Cardiology (2013)Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid modification; NICE Clinical Guideline (July 2014 -last updated May 2023) Replaced by NG238CKS Hypertension; NICE CKS, March 2023 (UK access only)He FJ, Li J, Macgregor GA; Effect of longer term modest salt reduction on blood pressure: Cochrane systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised trials. BMJ. 2013 Apr 3346:f1325. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f1325.Description of the DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) Eating Plan; National Institutes of HealthEttehad D, Emdin CA, Kiran A, et al; Blood pressure lowering for prevention of cardiovascular disease and death: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2016 Mar 5387(10022):957-67. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)01225-8. Epub 2015 Dec 24.Related InformationVideo: How to reduce blood pressureCardiovascular Disease (Atheroma)Are UK blood pressure levels on the rise?Living with High Blood PressureMedicine for High Blood Pressure  Cheese could protect blood vessels from damage caused by high-salt diet    3 minutes reading time  19-Sep-19  High blood pressure in mid-30s could shrink your brain    2 minutes reading time  21-Aug-19  Are UK blood pressure levels on the rise?    6 minutes reading time  21-Sep-17  Is salt good or bad for you?    7 minutes reading time  21-Dec-17  Last Thursday  I had my blood pressure checked at GPS and it was 143/93 which was great as it was the lowest it has been since the beginning of the year. Friday morning it was 171/114,Sat 175/115....   gill70346Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP Document ID  4271 (v49)  Last updated on   13 November 2023 Next review date  11 November 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Next article Living with High Blood Pressure Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on High Blood Pressure (Hypertension): Symptoms and Causes     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/heart-health/high-blood-pressure-hypertensionCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


