# How to Prevent Steroid-induced Osteoporosis | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Bones, Joints and Muscles    Osteoporosis  Preventing Steroid-induced Osteoporosis Last updated by Dr Ros Adleman   Peer reviewed by Dr Rachel Hudson  Last updated 20 Mar 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Osteoporosis      DXA Scan      Bisphosphonates      Calcium-rich Food      Vitamin D Deficiency In this series     Osteoporosis      DXA Scan      Bisphosphonates      Calcium-rich Food      Vitamin D Deficiency One of the side-effects of taking a steroid medicine in the long term is that it can increase your risk of developing 'thinning' of the bones (osteoporosis). This leaflet explores measures that can be taken to stop this occurring.In this article   What is steroid-induced osteoporosis?   How to prevent steroid-induced osteoporosis? In This Article     Preventing Steroid-induced OsteoporosisIn this article What is steroid-induced osteoporosis?  How to prevent steroid-induced osteoporosis? What is steroid-induced osteoporosis?If osteoporosis is thought to be due in part to taking a steroid medicine, it is known as steroid-induced osteoporosis. The use of steroid medicines is one of the leading causes of osteoporosis. Between 3 and 5 in 10 people who take steroid medicines in the long term will develop a fragility fracture because of osteoporosis if nothing is done to prevent this. To learn more about osteoporosis in general, see the separate leaflet called Osteoporosis.In general, when we are talking about steroid medicines that can cause steroid-induced osteoporosis, we are talking about long-term treatment. Long-term means taking it every day for three months or more, or having shorter courses very frequently. It also mainly refers to being treated with steroid tablets such as prednisolone. You would be considered to be at risk of steroid-induced osteoporosis if you have been taking prednisolone tablets at a dose of 7.5 mg per day or more, for three months or more.Long-term treatment with steroid creams does not carry the same risks of steroid-induced osteoporosis. However, long-term use of high doses of inhaled steroids may possibly also increase your risk of developing steroid-induced osteoporosis. Lower doses of inhaled steroids do not seem to increase the risk in the same way.Further studies are being done to get more information about this. For this reason, the dose of steroid in an inhaler is usually kept to a minimum so that it is just high enough to keep your asthma or other respiratory problem under control.How to prevent steroid-induced osteoporosis?There are a number of things that can be done to reduce your risk of developing steroid-induced 'thinning' of the bones (osteoporosis) if you are taking steroid tablets for three months or more. These may be things that you can change yourself in terms of your lifestyle, as well as treatment with medicines or other measures that your doctor may suggest.Lifestyle changesSee the separate leaflet called Osteoporosis for full details on lifestyle factors which can further increase the risk. However, briefly the following help to reduce risk:Stopping smoking.Limiting alcohol intake.Taking more exercise (particularly weight-bearing exercise).Having an adequate calcium and vitamin D intake, and considering supplements if you are not getting enough calcium and/or vitamin D. See the separate leaflets called Calcium-rich Diet, and Vitamin D Deficiency to read more about these specific aspects.Take the minimum dose of steroids possible for the shortest period of timeIn general, the higher the dose of steroid tablets taken in the long term, the higher your risk of developing a fracture due to osteoporosis (a fragility fracture). However, saying that, there is not really a safe dose of steroid tablets because even low doses can increase your fracture risk.Talk to your doctor about the dose of steroid tablets that you are taking. Could the amount of steroid be reduced? Is there another way that the steroid medication may be taken rather than as tablets by mouth? For example, steroids applied to the skin or inhaled into the lungs may be an option to treat some conditions. Taking the steroid medication in another way may help to reduce the effect of the steroids on your bones.How long a course of steroid tablets do you need?You should also discuss this with your doctor. The course of treatment should be as short as possible. However, as mentioned already above, there is often a balance between the risk of side-effects from taking steroid tablets and the symptoms and damage that may result from some diseases if they are not treated with steroids. It may be that it is more risky not to take the steroids. If this is the case, you may be given treatment to protect your bones from the effects of the steroids.Treatment with medicines may be needed for some peopleIf you have had a previous fragility fracture, you will usually be offered treatment with medicines to prevent steroid-induced osteoporosis if you are prescribed long-term steroid tablets. This is regardless of your age. If you are an older person, you will also usually be offered preventative treatment with medicines even if you have not had a previous fragility fracture.The medicines usually used to prevent steroid-induced osteoporosis are called bisphosphonates.  For more information about these medicines, see the separate leaflet called Bisphosphonates. There are several different types of bisphosphonate medicines including tablets and injections. There is evidence that these medicines can improve bone strength and reduce the risk of some fractures for people taking steroid medicines.Otherwise, whether or not preventative treatment with medicines will be suggested will depend on how high the doctor feels your risk is. You may have a DEXA scan to assess your bone density. The decision may depend on this result and any other risk factors for osteoporosis that you may have. Your doctor will be able to advise for your particular case.Previous article   Vitamin D DeficiencyAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Osteoporosis: assessing the risk of fragility fracture; NICE Clinical Guideline (August 2012, updated February 2017)Management of osteoporosis and the prevention of fragility fractures - A national clinical guideline; Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN - January 2021)Clinical guideline for the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis; National Osteoporosis Guideline Group (updated September 2021)Avenell A, Mak JC, O'Connell D; Vitamin D and vitamin D analogues for preventing fractures in post-menopausal women and older men. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Apr 144:CD000227. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000227.pub4.Allen CS, Yeung JH, Vandermeer B, et al; Bisphosphonates for steroid-induced osteoporosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Oct 510:CD001347. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001347.pub2.Chee C, Sellahewa L, Pappachan JM; Inhaled corticosteroids and bone health. Open Respir Med J. 2014 Jan 318:85-92. doi: 10.2174/1874306401408010085. eCollection 2014.Sutter SA, Stein EM; The Skeletal Effects of Inhaled Glucocorticoids. Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2016 Jun14(3):106-13. doi: 10.1007/s11914-016-0308-1.Prevention of Fragility Fractures; NICE CKS, July 2021 (UK access only)Related InformationOsteoporosisOral SteroidsOsteoporosis (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)  ProCorticosteroids and Corticosteroid Replacement Therapy ProCalcium and ergocalciferol tablets (CalciErgo, A1 Cal-E)  How to boost your vitamin D levels this winter    8 minutes reading time  16-Nov-23  Chemical found in soap and toothpaste linked to osteoporosis     2 minutes reading time  26-Jun-19  When to start worrying about your bones and osteoporosis    6 minutes reading time  21-Dec-17  What are the best exercises for osteoporosis?    4 minutes reading time  26-Jan-18  been on steroid predesolone for 2 years now off 2 months leg pain is agony any suggestions to reduce pain?   ronald38350Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Ros Adleman Peer reviewed by  Dr Rachel Hudson Document ID  12497 (v6)  Last updated on   20 March 2023 Next review date  18 March 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Vitamin D DeficiencyHealth informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on How to Prevent Steroid-induced Osteoporosis     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/bones-joints-muscles/osteoporosis-leaflet/preventing-steroid-induced-osteoporosisCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


