# How to tell the difference between COVID-19 and flu | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    SARS and MERS Virus    Features  Added to  Saved itemsIs it COVID-19 or flu this winter?        Save       Remove from Saved       Print      Share      FeedbackCases of flu and COVID-19 are both on the rise this winter, so how can you tell the difference between these viruses? Knowing which illness you're dealing with can help you to protect others and may help you get better quicker. Last updated by Lawrence Higgins   Peer reviewed by Dr Krishna Vakharia, MRCGP  Last updated 18 Dec 2023   Originally published 5 Oct 2021 7 mins readFlu (influenza) and COVID-19 are contagious respiratory illnesses, each caused by different viruses. COVID-19 is a result of a coronavirus infection and flu is from influenza viruses. There are other differences between them, such as how they are spread. However, their similarities in symptoms can be confusing, so it's important not to make a judgement on symptoms alone and to get a professional diagnosis.Dr Sarah Jarvis explains what to do if you think you have either COVID-19 or flu: "Regardless of which infection is causing your symptoms, you should stay at home if you think you have either, to avoid infecting others."Dr Jarvis says you should speak to your doctor if:You're finding it hard to breathe.You cough up blood or rust-coloured sputum.You have a long-term medical condition - such as diabetes, heart, lung, liver or nervous system condition.Your immune system is weakened by illness - such as blood cancer or HIV -  or treatment such as chemotherapy or medicine to suppress your immune system.You're pregnant.Your symptoms are getting worse rather than better.Similarities between COVID-19 and fluSymptoms shared by COVID-19 and flu virusesBoth COVID-19 and flu can be asymptomatic and you may have the illness without showing any signs. However, they also both share a range of moderate to severe symptoms including:Fever.Having chills.Coughing.Difficulty breathing.Fatigue.Sore throat.Runny or blocked nose.Muscle pain or aching body.Headaches.Being sick.Diarrhoea.Change in or loss of taste or smell, although this is more frequent with COVID-19.The latest COVID-19 variant Pirola may also trigger some less common symptoms.How do these viruses spread?Both COVID-19 and flu are spread through particles containing the virus when someone with either illness coughs, sneezes or talks. These particles can travel to the mouths or noses of nearby people, especially when people are within six feet of each other.Particles containing the viruses can also spread further in environments with poor ventilation.Both COVID-19 and flu are mostly caught by inhalation, but also through physical contact with an infected person - shaking hands - or touching a contaminated surface and then touching your own mouth, nose or eyes.Both viruses can be passed on regardless of whether someone is showing severe symptoms or not. Flu can spread for at least one day before any symptoms begin showing and COVID-19 for at least two days.Who is at high risk?Those most at risk of becoming very ill or dying as a result of COVID-19 and flu are:Older adults.Pregnant people.Those with underlying health issues.These groups are more likely to develop complications from the viruses and need hospital care.What complications can develop from having COVID-19 or flu?Severe forms of COVID-19 and flu can lead to other health complications such as:Pneumonia.Respiratory failure.Fluid in the lungs - acute respiratory distress syndrome.Sepsis.Heart attack and stroke.Organ failure.Worsening of existing long term (chronic) medical conditions involving the lungs, heart or nervous system, or diabetes.Inflammation of the heart, brain, or muscle tissues.Secondary bacterial or fungal infections.Treating COVID-19 or fluTreatment for the viruses depends on their severity. Many people with mild to moderate symptoms of COVID-19 or flu can get better at home using medicine bought from the pharmacy, drinking plenty of fluids and resting. However, those who fall into high-risk categories or have been hospitalised as a result of COVID-19 or flu should receive professional medical care.If you are worried about your health or your condition is worsening, contact your doctor or NHS 111. In an emergency, call 999. Our picks for Is it COVID-19 or flu this winter? Will we need a COVID-19 booster vaccine every year?COVID-19 booster vaccines are essential, giving you longer-term protection against getting serio...   4min  Will we need a COVID-19 booster vaccine every year?   4min  Why it's a good thing if you feel unwell after your COVID-19 booster jab   3min  What are the school COVID rules October 2023?    3minDifferences between COVID-19 and fluDifferences in symptoms of COVID-19 and fluCOVID-19 and flu have different incubation periods - the number of days it can take between becoming infected and starting to see symptoms. Those infected with COVID-19 can start showing symptoms 2-14 days after becoming infected, whereas flu has an incubation period of 1-4 days.Though they share many symptoms, some symptoms are more common in one virus than another. For example, body aches, headaches and chills are common flu symptoms that only appear sometimes in someone with COVID-19.Shortness of breath and respiratory issues are common signs of COVID-19, but are less common in someone with flu.Flu symptoms also appear suddenly, whereas COVID-19 symptoms may develop more gradually.Is one virus contagious for longer?COVID-19 and flu viruses spread in very similar ways, but COVID-19 is generally more contagious. COVID-19 can spread more quickly to infect a larger number of people.COVID-19 is also contagious for longer than the flu. It is not known exactly how long COVID-19 remains contagious in an infected person but a person with COVID-19 can be capable of passing on the virus for at least 10 days after symptoms appear. Even if someone is asymptomatic or has recovered, it can still be passed on.Most people with flu are contagious for one day before they show symptoms, but many remain contagious for around seven days. Those with weakened immune systems can be contagious for longer.People who are hospitalised with COVID-19 or flu can be contagious for 20 days or more.Which virus is more dangerous?Older people, those with underlying health conditions and pregnant people have the same chance of becoming seriously ill or dying from COVID-19 or flu.As with flu, complications following COVID-19 may lead to hospitalisation or death, even in healthy people with no pre-existing health conditions.Some people who have had COVID-19 can develop ongoing conditions which can last for weeks or even months - or long COVID.Common symptoms of long COVID include:Always feeling tired.Difficulty breathing.Heart palpitations.Coughing.Sleep problems.Changes in smell and taste.Multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS) can also happen. This causes different body organs to become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs. This very rare complication mainly affects young children.What are the complications?Most people recover from flu with a few days or a couple of weeks. Most people can manage their symptoms at home without hospital treatment. However, some complications may require hospitalisation if you become very unwell.Pneumonia is a serious complication which can result from either flu alone or from co-infection of flu virus and bacteria. Other possible serious complications following the flu can include inflammation of the heart, brain, or muscle tissues, and multi-organ failure.Flu also can worsen existing medical problems. For example, if you have asthma you may have more asthma attacks when you have the flu.Secondary bacterial or fungal infections are more common with flu than with COVID-19.With COVID-19, further health complications could include blood clots, and long COVID, where symptoms last for many weeks or months following infection. Long COVID can affect your mental as well as your physical health. Anyone can be affected by long COVID, even someone who didn't have any symptoms when they had COVID-19.How are flu and COVID-19 treated?Most people can manage flu or COVID-19 at home. Sometimes your doctor will prescribe medicines which fight viruses helping to speed up recovery, and ease symptoms. Neither flu nor COVID-19 can be treated with antibiotics as they are caused by viruses.Medication is usually not available to those with COVID-19 outside of hospitals but NHS England may contact you if you meet the criteria for treatment in the community. Many people find that painkillers and over-the-counter remedies commonly used for coughs, colds and sore throats can ease symptoms.Read nextWill we need a COVID-19 booster vaccine every year? Why it's a good thing if you feel unwell after your COVID-19 booster jabAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Related InformationCOVID-19: what you need to know about coronavirusCOVID-19: do you need to worry about coronavirus?COVID-19: the latest UK coronavirus guidelinesCOVID-19: what happens next with the coronavirus outbreak?COVID-19 coronavirus: do I need to self-isolate?  Will we need a COVID-19 booster vaccine every year?    4 minutes reading time  23-Oct-23  Why it's a good thing if you feel unwell after your COVID-19 booster jab    3 minutes reading time  20-Oct-23  What are the school COVID rules October 2023?     3 minutes reading time  20-Oct-23  Hi guys I tested positive for covid back in late August, my symptoms were a sore throat then a dry persistent cough but thankfully nothing serious. But then within a few days I began to experience...   ben34157Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Read next Will we need a COVID-19 booster vaccine every year?  Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on How to tell the difference between COVID-19 and flu     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/news-and-features/how-to-tell-the-difference-between-covid-19-and-fluCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


