# How to Manage Stress - 8 Techniques from a GP | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Mental Health  Stress Management Last updated by Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP    Peer reviewed by Dr Toni Hazell, MRCGP  Last updated 30 Jan 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Acute Stress Reaction      Mindfulness In this series     Acute Stress Reaction      Mindfulness This leaflet gives some general tips on how to manage stress. However, contact a doctor if you develop persistent anxiety symptoms.In this article   How to manage stress   What is stress?   How do you know if you're stressed?   Is stress harmful? In This Article     Stress ManagementIn this article How to manage stress  What is stress?  How do you know if you're stressed?  Is stress harmful? How to manage stressThe following is a list of suggestions that may be useful for stress management. Some will be more appropriate than others for people:Write a stress listYou can try making a list to help manage stress. Try keeping a diary over a few weeks and list the times, places and people that aggravate your stress levels. A pattern may emerge. Is it always the traffic on the way to work that sets things off to a bad start for the day? Perhaps it's the supermarket check-out, next door's dog, a work colleague, or something similar that may occur regularly and cause you stress.Once you have identified any typical or regular causes of stress, two things may then help to manage it:If you discuss this with a close friend or family member, it may help them and you to be aware of the reasons you feel stressed. Simply talking it through may help.These situations can be used as cues to relax. You can use simple relaxation techniques (see below) when stressful situations occur or are anticipated. For example, try doing neck stretching exercises when you are in that traffic jam rather than getting tense and stressed.Try simple relaxation techniquesDeep breathing. This means taking a long, slow breath in and very slowly breathing out. If you do this a few times and concentrate fully on breathing, you may find it quite relaxing. Some people find that moving from chest breathing to tummy (abdominal) breathing can be helpful. Sitting quietly, try putting one hand on your chest and the other on your tummy. You should aim to breathe quietly by moving your tummy, with your chest moving very little. This encourages the diaphragm to work efficiently and may help you avoid over-breathing.Muscular tensing and stretching. Try twisting your neck around each way as far as it is comfortable and then relax. Try fully tensing your shoulder and back muscles for several seconds and then relax completely.Try practising these simple techniques when you are relaxed; then use them routinely when you come across any stressful situation.Practise positive relaxationSetting specific times aside to relax positively can help with stress management. Don't just let relaxation happen, or not happen, at the mercy of work, family, etc. Plan it and look forward to it. Different people prefer different things. A long bath, a quiet stroll, sitting and just listening to a piece of music, etc. These times are not wasteful and you should not feel guilty about not 'getting on with things'. They can be times of reflection and putting life back in perspective.To further manage stress some people find it useful to set time aside for a relaxation programme such as meditation, yoga, Pilates or muscular exercises. You can also buy relaxation tapes to help you learn to relax.Take a time outTry to allow several times a day to 'stop' and take some time out. For example, getting up 15-20 minutes earlier than you need to is a good way to reduce stress and anxiety. You can use this time to think about and plan the coming day and to prepare for the day's events unrushed. Take a regular and proper lunch break, preferably away from work. Don't work over lunch. If work is busy, if possible try to take 5-10 minutes away every few hours to relax.Once or twice a week, try to plan some time just to be alone and unobtainable. For example, a gentle stroll or a sit in the park often helps to break out of life's stressful hustle and bustle.Exercise and maintain a healthy dietMany people feel that regular physical activity and maintaining a healthy diet reduces their level of stress. (It also keeps you fit and helps to prevent heart disease.) Any exercise is good but try to plan at least 30 minutes of exercise on at least five days a week. A brisk walk  outdoors on most days is a good start if you are not used to exercise. In addition, if you have difficulty in sleeping this may improve if you exercise regularly.Don't use smoking or alcohol as a crutchDon't be fooled that smoking and drinking can help with stress. In the long run, they don't. Drinking alcohol to 'calm nerves' may lead to problem drinking.Take up a hobbyMany people find that a hobby which has no deadlines and no pressures and which can be picked up or left easily, takes the mind off stresses. Such hobbies include, for example: different types of sports, knitting, listening to or making music, arts and crafts - eg, model-making, puzzles and reading for pleasure.Seek treatment for stressSome people find they have times in their lives when stress or anxiety becomes severe or difficult to cope with. See a doctor if stress or anxiety becomes worse. Further treatments such as anxiety management counselling - for example, cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) - or medication may be appropriate.For more information on how to manage stress during exam time, see the seperate feature called Exam time: stress-relieving gadgets.Looking for a counsellor?Video appointments with qualified counsellors are now available in Patient Access Book now What is stress?Stress is difficult to define or measure. Some people thrive on a busy lifestyle and are able to cope well with daily stresses. For some a little pressure may even improve how they perform. Other people become tense or stressed by the slightest change from their set daily routine. Most people fall somewhere in between but may have periods when levels of stress increase.Stress can be acute - a single major event such as a bereavement, feeling unwell or an argument. But it can also be due to longer-term causes, such as financial worries, times of political instability, heavy workload or conflict with people you encounter regularly. This is known as chronic stress. Alternatively, many minor sources of stress or tension, which you could manage perfectly well if there was no other stress in your life, can build up to make you feel overwhelmed. For example, in busy periods such as Christmas, it can become more difficult to manage stress.How do you know if you're stressed?Signs of stress building up include:Not being able to sleep properly with worries going through your mind.Minor problems causing you to feel impatient or irritable.Not being able to concentrate due to many things going through your mind.Being unable to make decisions.Drinking or smoking more.Not enjoying food so much.Being unable to relax and always feeling that something needs to be done.Feeling tense. Sometimes 'fight or flight' stress hormones are released causing physical symptoms. These include:Feeling sick (nauseated).A 'knot' in the stomach.Feeling sweaty with a dry mouth.A 'thumping' heart (palpitations).Headaches and muscle tension in the neck and shoulders.Sometimes stress builds up quickly - for example, the unexpected traffic jam. Sometimes it is ongoing - for example, with a difficult job. Sometimes symptoms of stress occur in response to a very upsetting and unexpected event in one's life. When this happens, the stress is referred to as 'acute". See the separate leaflet called Acute Stress Reaction. Our picks for Stress Management Why self-care for men is so importantMen account for three-quarters of all suicides, yet they are less likely to access therapies to ...   7min  Why self-care for men is so important   7min  The surprising ways stress can affect your body   6min  Exam time: stress-relieving gadgets   4min  Does stress make skin problems worse?   7minIs stress harmful?Ongoing stress is thought to be bad for health but this is difficult to prove. For example, stress is possibly a risk factor for developing heart problems in later life. The effects of stress may also contribute to other physical illnesses in ways that are not well understood. For example, it is thought that irritable bowel syndrome, psoriasis, migraine, tension headaches, high blood pressure and other health problems are made worse by an increased level of stress.Your work performance and relationships may also be affected by stress. Next article  Acute Stress Reaction  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  How to manage and reduce stress; Mental Health Foundation guide, 2022Yaribeygi H, Panahi Y, Sahraei H, et al; The impact of stress on body function: A review. EXCLI J. 2017 Jul 2116:1057-1072. doi: 10.17179/excli2017-480. eCollection 2017.Balmus IM, Robea M, Ciobica A, et al; Perceived stress and gastrointestinal habits in college students. Acta Endocrinol (Buchar). 2019 Apr-Jun15(2):274-275. doi: 10.4183/aeb.2019.274.Related InformationThe surprising ways stress can affect your bodyExam time: stress-relieving gadgetsDoes stress make skin problems worse?Acute Stress Reaction ProGeneralised Anxiety Disorder (Symptoms and Treatment) Pro  Why self-care for men is so important    7 minutes reading time  22-Feb-24  Stress-relieving tips to try every day    6 minutes reading time  22-Feb-24  Signs your job is making you sick    6 minutes reading time  25-Apr-18  What are the symptoms of burnout?    4 minutes reading time  24-Nov-22  The last year of my life has been a brutal one. At the age of 22, I am in the lowest of lows and I desperately need some help!Here’s my tale:About a year ago, a couple months after an extremely...   TaylorMasonJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Toni Hazell, MRCGP Document ID  4337 (v42)  Last updated on   30 January 2023 Next review date  29 January 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Next article Acute Stress Reaction Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on How to Manage Stress - 8 Techniques from a GP     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/mental-health/stress-managementCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


