# Knee/Hip Arthroscopy and Arthroscopic Surgery | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Bones, Joints and Muscles    Joint Pain  Arthroscopy and Arthroscopic Surgery Last updated by Dr Roger Henderson   Peer reviewed by Dr Adrian Bonsall  Last updated 27 Jul 2016   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Joint Pain      Dislocation In this series     Joint Pain      Dislocation This page has been archived. It has not been updated since 27/07/2016. External links and references may no longer work.Arthroscopy is a surgical procedure which uses a thin telescope with a light source (an arthroscope) to look inside joints. As well as being able to look inside, the surgeon can use an arthroscope to perform keyhole surgery. Arthroscopy is most often used to investigate or treat knee problems. Arthroscopy can also be used for other joints, including the shoulder, hip, elbow, wrist and ankle joints, and even for hand or foot problems.Note: the information below is a general guide only. The arrangements, and the way tests are performed, may vary between different hospitals. Always follow the instructions given by your doctor or local hospital.In this article   Understanding joints   What is an arthroscopy?   What is arthroscopic surgery?   How is it done?   Are there any possible complications? In This Article     Arthroscopy and Arthroscopic SurgeryIn this article Understanding joints  What is an arthroscopy?  What is arthroscopic surgery?  How is it done?  Are there any possible complications? Understanding jointsThe place where two bones meet is called a joint. Joints allow movement and flexibility of various parts of the body. The movement of the bones is cased by muscles which pull on tendons that are attached to bone.Cartilage covers the end of bones. Between the cartilage of two bones which form a joint there is a small amount of thick fluid called synovial fluid. This fluid lubricates the joint which allows smooth movement between the bones.The synovial fluid is made by the tissue surrounding a joint (the synovium). The outer part of the synovium is called the capsule. This is tough, gives the joint stability and stops the bones from moving 'out of joint'. Surrounding ligaments and muscles also help to give support and stability to joints.In the knee joint, the cartilage covering the lower part of the joint is thickened in the inner and outer part of the joint. These two areas of cartilage are sometimes called menisci. The menisci act like shock absorbers in the knee and are sometimes torn following a knee injury. Also, there are two strong cross-shaped (cruciate) ligaments in the middle of the knee joints, which are attached to the ends of the calf bone (tibia) and the thigh bone (femur). These also can be torn following a knee injury.Do you need a physiotherapist?Book a private appointment with a local physio today Book now What is an arthroscopy?Arthroscopy is a procedure to look inside a joint by using an arthroscope. An arthroscope is like a thin telescope with a light source. It is used to light up and magnify the structures inside a joint. An arthroscope is passed through a small cut (incision) in the skin and into a joint.Arthroscopy may be done to investigate symptoms such as pain, swelling, or instability of a joint. An arthroscopy may show damage to cartilage or ligaments within a joint, fragments of bone or cartilage which have broken off (loose bodies), or signs of arthritis.What is arthroscopic surgery?In addition to simply looking inside, a doctor can use fine instruments which are also passed into the joint through a small incision in the skin (keyhole surgery). These instruments are used to cut, trim, take a sample to be studied under a microscope (biopsy), grab, etc, inside the joint. Arthroscopic surgery can be used for various procedures which include:Taking out small bits of bone or cartilage that have broken off into the joint space.Repairing or taking out torn ligaments.Removing damaged cartilage.Removing tissue surrounding the joint (synovium), which has become inflamed.About 17 in 20 arthroscopic procedures are done on the knee joint, about 2 in 20 involve the shoulder, and a small number are done on other joints, including the ankle, elbow, wrist and hip.Arthroscopic surgery can often treat or repair joints without the need for a more traditional open surgery of a joint, which involves a large cut (incision). As a rule, compared with traditional surgery of a joint, with arthroscopic surgery there is usually:Less pain following the procedure.Less risk of complications.A shorter hospital stay (it is often done as a day-case procedure).A quicker recovery.How is it done?Arthroscopy and arthroscopic surgery may be done under local or general anaesthesia. The type of anaesthesia chosen depends on the joint being examined and on various other considerations. The skin over the joint will be cleaned. You will be asked to adopt a position best suited for the procedure. For example, you may need to lie on your back with your knee bent for knee procedures, or lie on your side for shoulder procedures, etc. For arthroscopy of the knee a pressure band (tourniquet) may be put around the upper part of the leg to restrict blood flow.The surgeon makes a small cut (incision) next to the joint - just a few millimetres long. The thin telescope with a light source (the arthroscope) is pushed through the incision into the joint. An arthroscope used for the knee joint is about the width of a pencil. A thinner one is used for smaller joints such as the wrist and ankle. One or more separate incisions are made to enable the surgeon to insert:A thin examining probe into the joint; orFine instruments which are used for surgery; orFluid to make viewing easier and to flush out the joint.The arthroscope transmits pictures through a camera attachment on to a viewing screen. By looking at the screen, the surgeon can see inside the joint, including the ends of the probe or operating instruments. So, for much of the time, the surgeon is watching the viewing screen to guide him or her in manipulating the instruments within the joint.When the procedure is finished, the arthroscope and other instruments are removed. The incisions may need a stitch or two but stitches are often not needed, as the incisions are so small. A sterile dressing is put over the incisions. An ice pack may be applied for a while to minimise any swelling. Depending on what was done and the problem you have, a knee joint may then be covered with a large bandage or other knee support.Many people can go home shortly after the procedure. The type of problems differ. Therefore, instructions for follow-up and what you should and should not do will be given to you by a doctor or nurse. (For example, if you should have physiotherapy, or if you should rest, or if you should exercise, etc.)Are there any possible complications?In most cases the procedure is done without any problems. Complications are generally rare but can include:Accidental damage to structures inside or near to the joint.Excessive bleeding inside the joint which can cause a lot of swelling and pain.Infection within the joint - this can be serious.As with any operation, there is a risk of allergy to local anaesthetics, or complications of anaesthesia if a general anaesthetic is used.After arthroscopy or arthroscopic surgery, see a doctor urgently if you:Have pain or swelling in the joint, which becomes worse. In particular, if the joint is also hot, tender and red. (This may indicate bleeding or infection in the joint.)Develop a high temperature.See fluid, pus or blood coming from the site of the cut (incision).Develop numbness or tingling near to the joint (which may indicate nerve damage).Previous article   Joint Pain Next article  Dislocation  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Related InformationRheumatological History, Examination and Investigations ProJoint PainX-ray TestSulindac tablets - a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)Hot Swollen Joints Pro  Joint pain - is it bursitis?    4 minutes reading time  16-Feb-24  Supermarket shopping for foods to help stiff and painful joints     8 minutes reading time  11-Jan-24  Can winter weather make joint pain worse?    5 minutes reading time  27-Dec-19  How to protect your joints as you get older    6 minutes reading time  18-Jun-21  what has lupus symptoms but not lupus? MS symptoms but not MS? symptoms of Rheumatoid arthritis but isn't?i have thinning hair, crumbling teeth. severe joint pain, spondylosis of the spine and neck....   sharen24968Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Roger Henderson Peer reviewed by  Dr Adrian Bonsall Document ID  4739 (v41)  Last updated on   27 July 2016 Status  Archived The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Joint PainNext article Dislocation Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Knee/Hip Arthroscopy and Arthroscopic Surgery     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/bones-joints-muscles/joint-pain/arthroscopy-and-arthroscopic-surgeryCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


