# Lichen sclerosus: Causes, Symptoms and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Women's Health    Vulval Problems  Lichen Sclerosus Last updated by Dr Doug McKechnie   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy  Last updated 13 Jul 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Vulval Problems      Bartholin's Cyst and Abscess      Itchy Vulva (Pruritus Vulvae)      Vulvitis In this series     Vulval Problems      Bartholin's Cyst and Abscess      Itchy Vulva (Pruritus Vulvae)      Vulvitis Lichen sclerosus is an uncommon skin condition. It most commonly affects the genital skin (vulva) of women. It can occur at any age.In this article   What is lichen sclerosus?   Causes of lichen sclerosus   Symptoms of lichen sclerosus   When to see a doctor   Risk factors   Are there any complications from lichen sclerosus?   How is lichen sclerosus diagnosed?   Lichen sclerosus treatment   Will lichen sclerosus go away?   Can you prevent lichen sclerosus? In This Article     Lichen SclerosusIn this article What is lichen sclerosus?  Causes of lichen sclerosus  Symptoms of lichen sclerosus  When to see a doctor  Risk factors  Are there any complications from lichen sclerosus?  How is lichen sclerosus diagnosed?  Lichen sclerosus treatment  Will lichen sclerosus go away?  Can you prevent lichen sclerosus? What is lichen sclerosus?Lichen sclerosus (pronounced 'lie-ken scler-roe-suss') is a skin condition that mainly affects the genital skin (vulva) in women and the penis in men. It most commonly occurs in middle-aged women. Symptoms include itch, soreness and changes in the appearance of affected skin. Treatment with a steroid cream or ointment often eases the symptoms.Lichen sclerosusMikael Häggström, CC0, via Wikimedia CommonsMikael Häggström, CC0, via Wikimedia CommonsCauses of lichen sclerosusThe cause of lichen sclerosus is not known. In lichen sclerosus, inflammation of the affected skin changes the structure of the skin.Lichen sclerosus is probably an autoimmune disease. An autoimmune condition is one where the body's immune system accidentally attacks your own body. This causes inflammation and damage to the affected part of the body.In people with lichen sclerosus the genital area of skin may be attacked by some parts of the immune system which then causes inflammation. However, this has not been proved and it is not really known what triggers lichen sclerosus to develop.About 1 in 4 people with lichen sclerosus have another autoimmune disease such as thyroid disease, vitiligo, or pernicious anaemia. This is why it is thought that lichen sclerosus might be an autoimmune disease.Symptoms of lichen sclerosusWomen and girls - vulval and anal areaTypically, small pearly white spots develop on the genital skin (vulva). The spots are usually itchy. However, in some people there is no itch or other discomfort and lichen sclerosus is sometimes diagnosed by chance when the genitals are examined by a doctor for another reason.In about 3 in 10 cases, the skin around the back passage (anus) is also affected. Sometimes only the skin around the anus is affected. Typically, the itch and irritation become persistent and distressing. The itch tends to be worse at night which can disturb sleep.Sometimes soreness rather than itch is the main symptom. Lichen sclerosus is a skin condition only and does not extend into the vagina or inside the anus. Over time, the white spots may become larger and join together.The whole vulva and/or anal skin may then become white and be more fragile than normal. The fragile skin may become damaged, inflamed, raw and prone to painful splitting and cracking. It may become painful to have sex. If the anal skin is affected, passing poo (faeces) may cause pain.If left untreated, over months or years the vulva may shrink (doctors call this 'atrophy'). In some cases the changes of the vulval skin may make the entrance to the vagina narrower. This can make it difficult or painful to have sex. Also, thrush and other infections tend to be more common if the vulva is sore or cracked.Symptoms may slowly get worse but not all the above symptoms may occur. It can take months or years from the first small spots to progress to more severe symptoms. At first the symptoms may be mistaken for thrush or other problems: often women have tried lots of creams from the chemist before being examined and having lichen sclerosus diagnosed.Men and boys - penisWhite spots develop on the foreskin and end of the penis. These can be sore. In time, the changes to the affected skin may cause difficulty in retracting the foreskin and in passing urine. Erections may become painful. The anal skin is rarely affected in men.Other areas of skinSometimes small patches of lichen sclerosus occur on other parts of the body. These look like small pearly white areas on the skin. Sometimes they occur in people who also have genital lichen sclerosus. Sometimes they occur without genital problems. Away from the genital area, patches of lichen sclerosus usually do not cause itch or other symptoms.When to see a doctorSee a doctor if you think you might have lichen sclerosus.They will examine the affected area. They may also refer you to a specialist (a dermatologist, gynaecologist or urologist with interest in genital skin problems) to confirm the diagnosis.Worried about your health?Find a range of women's health pharmacy services, delivered by local providers at a time that suits you Book now Risk factorsAlthough we don't know exactly what causes lichen sclerosus, several risk factors have been identified:Gender. Lichen sclerosus is more common in women than in men.Genetics. Lichen sclerosus seems to be more common in some families; it may be that some people inherit genes that make them more likely to develop lichen sclerosus after something else happens, such as an injury.Age and hormones. Lichen sclerosus most commonly develops in women after the menopause, and, less commonly, girls who have not yet gone through puberty. Hormones, such as oestrogen and progesterone, are low in pre-pubertal girls and post-menopausal women, and may be linked to the condition.Are there any complications from lichen sclerosus?The itch and discomfort may cause a lot of distress. If untreated, lichen sclerosis can cause scarring of the vulva, which can make it painful to pass urine. Scarring can make the vaginal opening narrower, which can make penetrative sex painful and sometimes impossible. There is also a small increased risk of developing cancer of the vulva.The exact risk is not known but it is thought that about 4 in 100 women with lichen sclerosus develop this cancer. In men there is a small increased risk of developing cancer of the penis. Again, the exact risk is unknown but it is thought that around 8 in 100 men with lichen sclerosus develop this cancer.Topical steroid treatment is effective at preventing scarring, and also seems to reduce the risk of cancer developing.How is lichen sclerosus diagnosed?The appearance is often fairly typical, in which case no further tests are needed. If the diagnosis is in doubt, a small sample (biopsy) of affected skin may be taken under local anaesthetic.The sample of skin is put under a microscope to look at the structure of the skin cells and tissues. This can confirm the diagnosis and rule out other disorders which can sometimes copy (mimic) this condition.If lichen sclerosus is diagnosed it is usual also to do a routine blood test to check for an underactive thyroid gland. This is because of the association between lichen sclerosus and autoimmune diseases and, in particular, autoimmune thyroid disease. Up to 3 in 10 people with lichen sclerosus also have an underactive thyroid gland.Lichen sclerosus treatmentTopical steroidsA strong steroid ointment or cream (topical steroid) is the main treatment (clobetasol or mometasone). Steroids reduce inflammation. It is usual to use the ointment or cream regularly for three months.A common plan is to use a single application at night for four weeks, followed by alternate nights for four weeks and then twice a week for four weeks. You must use the steroid as directed by your doctor. Keep on with treatment for as long as advised.Irritation tends to ease after two weeks or so, but the skin may take about three months of treatment to look and feel better.The skin may return to normal if lichen sclerosus is diagnosed and treated with a topical steroid at an early stage. If the appearance of the skin has already changed a lot, the changes may not reverse much with topical steroid treatment even though symptoms of itch and soreness are often relieved.After the initial regular treatment for about three months, you may then only need to use the ointment or cream once or twice every 1-2 weeks to keep symptoms away.Some general measuresUse a moisturising (emollient) cream or ointment instead of soap to clean the genital area.Avoid bubble baths, scented soap, detergents, perfumes, etc, to the genital skin (vulva) of women.These may irritate the skin and make symptoms worse.Lubricants are useful during sex if having sex is painful.Other treatments that are sometimes usedOther medicines. In the small number of cases where topical steroids do not help, a skin specialist may advise other medicines to reduce inflammation.A vaginal dilator may be advised if you have any narrowing of the vaginal opening. A vaginal dilator is a cylinder-shaped piece of plastic that you insert into the vagina to gently stretch the opening and the inside. You use it each day for a time as directed by your doctor.Surgery. An operation to widen the opening of the vagina is occasionally needed in women with severe lichen sclerosus which has caused narrowing of the vaginal entrance. (But note: regular use of a dilator as described above may prevent the need for surgery.)Foreskin removal (circumcision) may be needed in some affected men or boys.Some men may need other operations to improve the narrowing and scarring of the water pipe (urethra) caused by this condition.Will lichen sclerosus go away?There is no permanent cure for lichen sclerosus. However, treatment with a topical steroid usually controls the symptoms of itch and soreness, and often prevents the condition from getting worse. Occasionally the condition clears away for good for no apparent reason. This is more common in young girls when the condition often goes during puberty.Can you prevent lichen sclerosus?The exact cause of lichen sclerosus is unknown, and we don't know of any way to prevent it from developing.Previous article   Itchy Vulva (Pruritus Vulvae) Next article  Vulvitis  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Lewis FM, Tatnall FM, Velangi SS, et al; British Association of Dermatologists guidelines for the management of lichen sclerosus, 2018. Br J Dermatol. 2018 Apr178(4):839-853. doi: 10.1111/bjd.16241.Krapf JM, Mitchell L, Holton MA, et al; Vulvar Lichen Sclerosus: Current Perspectives. Int J Womens Health. 2020 Jan 1512:11-20. doi: 10.2147/IJWH.S191200. eCollection 2020.Fruchter R, Melnick L, Pomeranz MK; Lichenoid vulvar disease: A review. Int J Womens Dermatol. 2017 Mar 273(1):58-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ijwd.2017.02.017. eCollection 2017 Mar.Kirtschig G; Lichen Sclerosus-Presentation, Diagnosis and Management. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2016 May 13113(19):337-43. doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2016.0337.Related InformationLichen Sclerosus ProDyspareunia ProMometasone nasal spray (Clarinaze, Nasonex)Allergic Rhinitis ProDyspareunia (Pain Having Sex)  What do normal labia look like?    5 minutes reading time  15-Oct-21  Labiaplasties – what are they and are they ever medically necessary?    7 minutes reading time  20-Aug-20  Understanding vulvodynia and why it causes painful sex    5 minutes reading time  26-Jan-18  How to manage lichen sclerosus and genital itching     5 minutes reading time  01-Jul-18  Just wondering if anyone who has Vulvar Lichens Sclerosus also has Candida Albicans? I contracted Candida Albicans more than 15 years ago after receiving 3 z-pacs of antibiotics back to back, which...   SweetjeanJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Doug McKechnie Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy Document ID  4536 (v48)  Last updated on   13 July 2023 Next review date  11 July 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Itchy Vulva (Pruritus Vulvae)Next article Vulvitis Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Lichen sclerosus: Causes, Symptoms and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/womens-health/vulval-problems-leaflet/lichen-sclerosusCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


