# Low Testosterone (Testosterone Deficiency): Symptoms and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Men's Health    Erectile Dysfunction (Impotence)  Low Testosterone Last updated by Dr Pippa Vincent, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP  Last updated 8 Jun 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Erectile Dysfunction (Impotence) In this series     Erectile Dysfunction (Impotence) Low testosterone in men (testosterone deficiency) is often part of the ageing process and therefore common in older men. It can also occur at any age as a result of conditions affecting the testicles or the pituitary gland in the brain.Low testosterone can be treated with testosterone replacement therapy. Any underlying cause for the testosterone deficiency will also need treatment. The outlook will depend on the underlying cause.In this article   What is low testosterone?   What causes low testosterone?   How common is low testosterone?   Low testosterone symptoms   How to test for low testosterone   Treatment of low testosterone   What is the outlook? In This Article     Low TestosteroneIn this article What is low testosterone?  What causes low testosterone?  How common is low testosterone?  Low testosterone symptoms  How to test for low testosterone  Treatment of low testosterone  What is the outlook? What is low testosterone?Low testosterone (testosterone deficiency) in men occurs when the body is unable to make enough testosterone. It is sometimes called hypogonadism. Low testosterone can significantly affect a man's health and quality of life.Testosterone is the most important sex hormone in men. Its production is controlled by both the brain and the testicles (testes). The body starts to produce testosterone during puberty. From the age of about 30 years, testosterone levels usually start to decrease.Testosterone is essential for developing and maintaining male characteristics. Testosterone also has effects on sexual function. Low testosterone levels increase a man's risk of developing disease of the heart and blood vessels (cardiovascular disease), and increase the risk of early death.What causes low testosterone?Low testosterone can be caused by normal ageing. However, there are other potential causes of low testosterone. Some causes can be inherited. Low testosterone may be present at birth or it may develop later in life.Being significantly overweight or obese at any age is linked to low testosterone.Testosterone levels can reduce due to a physical illness, surgery or emotional stress, but in these situations the testosterone level will go back to normal once the underlying problem has been treated.Primary testosterone deficiencyLow testosterone may be caused by a failure of the testicles (testes) to make enough testosterone. This is sometimes called primary testosterone deficiency. Common causes of primary testosterone deficiency include:Klinefelter's syndrome. A male normally has one X and one Y chromosome. In Klinefelter's syndrome, two or more X chromosomes are present in addition to one Y chromosome.Undescended testicles. This is where a baby is born without one or both of his testicles in the scrotum. They are usually in the lower part of the pelvis but have failed to migrate into the scrotum. If they have not descended by 6 months of age then surgery is needed to bring them into the scrotum. Testicles need to be slightly cooler than normal body temperature in order to function well. If the testicles remain inside the body rather than the scrotum they will be too warm and this reduces their ability to produce testosterone.Mumps orchitis. This is where there is an inflammation of the testes due to the mumps infection (which can largely be prevented by immunisation with the MMR vaccine).Haemochromatosis. This is an inherited condition causing high iron levels to build up.Injury to the testicles.Cancer treatment. Both chemotherapy or radiotherapy can interfere with testosterone and sperm production.Secondary testosterone deficiencyLow testosterone can also be caused by a problem with parts of the brain (hypothalamus and pituitary gland) which make the hormones that stimulate the testicles to make testosterone. This is sometimes called secondary testosterone deficiency. See the separate leaflet called Pituitary Gland Disorders for further information.In secondary testosterone deficiency, the testicles are normal but don't function properly because of a problem with the pituitary gland or hypothalamus. A number of conditions can cause secondary testosterone deficiency, including:Pituitary gland disorders such as a benign tumour called a prolactinoma.HIV/AIDS: can cause low levels of testosterone by affecting the hypothalamus, the pituitary gland and the testicles.Some medicines (such as opiate painkillers and some hormones): can affect testosterone production.Worried about your health?Find a range of men's health services, delivered by local professionals today Book now How common is low testosterone?Men are more likely to develop low testosterone as they get older. It is also more common in men who are overweight and men who are in poor general health with long-term health conditions.One large study in Europe found that testosterone deficiency affected about 2 in 100 men aged 40 to 79 years. Testosterone deficiency affected about 5 in 100 men aged 70 to 79 years.Low testosterone symptomsThe symptoms will depend on when the condition develops.If an unborn male baby does not produce enough testosterone during the pregnancy then the testicles won't develop properly and the baby may be born with either:Female genitals.Genitals that are neither clearly male nor clearly female (ambiguous genitals); orUnderdeveloped male genitals.In adult males, low testosterone may cause:Erectile dysfunction.Infertility.Decrease in beard and body hair growth.Decrease in muscle mass.Development of breast tissue (gynaecomastia).Loss of bone density (osteoporosis).If testosterone deficiency develops before puberty then it may also cause:Delayed puberty.Lack of deepening of the voice.Impaired growth of the penis and testicles.Excessive growth of the arms and legs compared with the trunk of the body.As testosterone levels decrease in older men, some men experience symptoms similar to those of the menopause in women, such as:Excessive tiredness (fatigue).Decreased sex drive (reduced libido).Difficulty concentrating.Hot flushes.How to test for low testosteroneMany older men with low testosterone are never diagnosed. Problems such as tiredness, low sex drive and erectile dysfunction can be thought to be due to the normal ageing process so medical help is often not sought.Testosterone deficiency can be identified by blood tests which might be suggested when describing decreased sex drive (reduced libido) or erectile dysfunction.Men who don't respond to the medicines that are used to treat erectile dysfunction (such as sildenafil), should also have their testosterone level checked.If tests confirm a low testosterone level, referral to a urologist or andrology specialist would usually be suggested. They can offer further testing to determine if a problem with the testicles (testes) or a pituitary gland abnormality is the cause. These further tests may include:Testing for other hormone levels (some pituitary gland disorders affect more than one hormone).Semen analysis.Pituitary computerised tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan.Genetic tests.Testicular biopsy.Treatment of low testosteroneCan low testosterone be prevented?Early detection in boys can help prevent problems from delayed puberty. Testosterone treatment can stimulate puberty and the development of sex characteristics, such as increased muscle mass, beard and pubic hair growth, and growth of the penis.Early diagnosis and treatment in adult men provides better protection against loss of bone density (osteoporosis) and cardiovascular disease. Treatment can also improve tiredness, general well-being, erectile dysfunction and sex drive.The treatment for low testosterone also depends on the underlying cause.For men without another underlying cause, maintaining a healthy body weight is important. Obesity in young men is increasing and there has been shown to be an increased number of young men with low testosterone levels in the United States, resulting from obesity.Testosterone replacementTestosterone treatment is usually given in the form of a gel. Other forms of testosterone treatment include long-acting injections or using a patch applied to your skin.Side-effects of testosterone replacementTestosterone replacement has been shown to cause:Worsening sleep apnoea.Acne.Benign prostatic hypertrophy (non-cancerous enlargement of the prostate gland).Growth of prostate cancer (in men who already have prostate cancer).Gynaecomastia (enlargement of breast tissue).Shrinking of the testicles (testicular atrophy) and reduction in sperm count.Red blood cell production over-development (which can lead to increased risks of blood clots in the legs or lungs).Increased anger and aggression though not increased physical aggression.Worsening of heart failure (in men who already have heart failure).There are concerns about possible increased risks of heart disease and possible risks of prostate cancer development - neither of which have been clearly shown in studies to date.Testosterone replacement is contra-indicated (not allowed) in patients with male breast cancer, prostate cancer, men with severe heart failure, men with a very raised haematocrit (a marker of red blood cell production) and men actively wanting to conceive a child in the future.Other treatmentsIf low testosterone is caused by a pituitary gland problem, treatment with pituitary hormones may stimulate sperm production and improve fertility. Testosterone replacement therapy can be used.If a pituitary tumour is the cause of low testosterone then this will require treatment, such as surgical removal, chemotherapy or radiotherapy, as well as replacement therapy with other hormones.Although there's often no effective treatment to restore fertility in a man with primary testosterone deficiency, infertility treatments may be helpful.What is the outlook?There have been many studies looking at the benefits or otherwise of treating low testosterone levels with testosterone replacement. The results of these are mixed.A large review of more than 150 studies in 2016 showed that there was no evidence of benefit of testosterone replacement for heart disease (and some evidence for increased cardiac events), no significant benefit of testosterone on libido and no consistent benefit on mood or cognitive function. The majority of studies showed that testosterone increased muscle mass but did not have an effect on muscle strength or function. That review said that the evidence from randomised control trials was said not to support treatment for physical function, sexual function, mood or cognition.Subsequent reviews have been more positive with evidence of benefit of testosterone for libido and mood. Studies also tend to show that testosterone can be of benefit in improving symptoms of erectile dysfunction when used alongside medications such as sildenafil in men who had no response to sildenafil (or other similar medications) alone. There was little evidence of testosterone treatment alone being of significant benefit.It is thought that some of the apparent benefits of testosterone might be related to healthier men generally being more aware of their bodies and being more likely to be prescribed testosterone.Previous article   Erectile Dysfunction (Impotence)Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Livingston M, Kalansooriya A, Hartland AJ, et al; Serum testosterone levels in male hypogonadism: Why and when to check - A review. Int J Clin Pract. 2017 Nov71(11). doi: 10.1111/ijcp.12995. Epub 2017 Oct 5.Huo S, Scialli AR, McGarvey S, et al; Treatment of Men for "Low Testosterone": A Systematic Review. PLoS One. 2016 Sep 2111(9):e0162480. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0162480. eCollection 2016.Low Testosterone in Adolescents and Young Adults; CohenThe Impact of Testosterone on Erectile Function; SchardeinRizk PJ, Kohn TP, Pastuszak AW, et al; Testosterone therapy improves erectile function and libido in hypogonadal men. Curr Opin Urol. 2017 Nov27(6):511-515. doi: 10.1097/MOU.0000000000000442.Testosterone and Sexual Desire; NguyenAssociation of Testosterone with Alleviation of Symptoms of Depression in Men; JAMA PsychiatryIs Testosterone Replacement Therapy Right For You? ; Web MDA practical guide on the assessment and management of testosterone deficiency in adult men; British Society for Sexual Medicine (2017)Related InformationErectile Dysfunction (Impotence)Pituitary Gland DisordersInfertilityInfertility Treatments (IVF)Testosterone injection and gel (Nebido, Testogel, Tostran)  What you need to know before you take erectile dysfunction medication     6 minutes reading time  08-Jul-19  How does alcohol affect your sex life?    6 minutes reading time  11-Jun-19  Are erection problems getting more common in young men?    6 minutes reading time  07-Dec-18  Do condoms really cause erection problems?    5 minutes reading time  10-May-19  I have had this for a while now but have been too embarrassed to talk about it. I'm quite anxious about it. Does anyone know what this is?   jack-ellis55831Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Pippa Vincent, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Document ID  30577 (v2)  Last updated on   08 June 2023 Next review date  12 May 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Erectile Dysfunction (Impotence)Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Low Testosterone (Testosterone Deficiency): Symptoms and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/mens-health/erectile-dysfunction-impotence/testosterone-deficiencyCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


