# Malaria Prevention: Antimalarial Medicine and Advice | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Travel and Vaccinations    Malaria  Malaria Prevention Last updated by Dr Hayley Willacy   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 16 Jan 2024   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Malaria In this series     Malaria It is sensible to find out whether there is a risk of malaria in the place you are visiting. If there is a risk, you can avoid getting malaria by taking steps to avoid mosquito bites, and in some cases by taking antimalarial medication. Malaria can be a life-threatening illness, so it is extremely important to consider prevention before travelling to an at-risk area.In this article   How to prevent malaria   Awareness of the risk of malaria   Malaria bite prevention   Antimalarial tablets   Side-effects of antimalarial tablets In This Article     Malaria PreventionIn this article How to prevent malaria  Awareness of the risk of malaria  Malaria bite prevention  Antimalarial tablets  Side-effects of antimalarial tablets How to prevent malariaThere is an ABCD for prevention of malaria. This is:Awareness of risk of malaria.Bite prevention.Chemoprophylaxis. This means taking antimalarial medication to prevent the disease.Diagnosis should be made promptly and treatment started quickly. Seek medical attention urgently if you become unwell after travelling to a high-risk area.Malaria is a serious infection, so prevention is crucial.Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGPAwareness of the risk of malariaBefore travelling it is important to find out if there is a risk of malaria where you are going. You can find this out on the Fitfortravel website, or from your travel clinic or pharmacist.The risk varies between countries and can depend on the type of trip. For example, back-packing or travelling to rural areas is generally more risky than staying in urban hotels.In some countries the risk varies between seasons - malaria is more common in the wet season. In other countries, the risk varies depending on which part of the country you visit. One part of the country may be an area where there is a risk, and in other areas there is no or low risk.In high mountainous areas there is often no risk, whilst in lower warmer areas there may be higher risk. The mosquito involved thrives in warm, humid conditions, so places with this sort of climate tend to be high-risk areas.Risk is particularly high in Africa, much of Asia and parts of South America.Western Europe and the United States of America are not areas of risk.The main type of parasite and the amount of resistance to medication vary in different countries. Although risk varies, all travellers to malaria-risk countries should take precautions to prevent malaria.The mosquitoes which transmit malaria commonly fly from dusk to dawn and therefore evenings and nights are the most dangerous time for transmission.Book a pharmacy appointment todayArrange a consultation with your local pharmacist via Patient Access to discuss your travel plans and malaria prevention. Book now Malaria bite preventionInsect repellentYou should use an effective insect repellent on clothing and any exposed skin. Diethyltoluamide (DEET) is safe, the most effective insect repellent and can be sprayed on to clothes. It lasts up to three hours for 20%, up to six hours for 30% and up to 12 hours for 50% DEET.There is no further increase in duration of protection beyond a concentration of 50%. Because 50% DEET lasts longer, you do not need to apply it so often. It is also more effective in this higher concentration.When both sunscreen and DEET are required, DEET should be applied after the sunscreen has been applied. DEET can be used on babies and children over 2 months of age. In addition, DEET can be used, in a concentration of up to 50%, if you are pregnant. It is also safe to use if you are breastfeeding. If you have sensitive skin you may find DEET irritating. Insecticides containing picaridin are a useful alternative.Mosquito netsIf you sleep outdoors or in an unscreened room, ideally you should use mosquito nets impregnated with an insecticide (such as pyrethroid). The net should be long enough to fall to the floor all around your bed and be tucked under the mattress.Check the net regularly for holes. Nets need to be re-impregnated with insecticide every six to twelve months (depending on how frequently the net is washed) to remain effective. Long-lasting nets, in which the pyrethroid is incorporated into the material of the net itself, are also available and can last approximately three to five years.Covering-up bare skinYou should try to cover up bare areas with long-sleeved, loose-fitting clothing, such as long trousers and socks. If you are outside after sunset you should definitely cover up to reduce the risk of mosquitoes biting.Clothing may also be sprayed or impregnated with permethrin, which reduces the risk of being bitten through your clothes.Air-conditionersSleeping in an air-conditioned room reduces the likelihood of mosquito bites, due to the room temperature being lowered.Mesh nettingDoors, windows and other possible mosquito entry routes to sleeping accommodation should be screened with fine mesh netting. You should spray the room before dusk with an insecticide (usually a pyrethroid) to kill any mosquitoes that may have come into the room during the day.Other prevention methodsIf electricity is available, you should use an electrically heated device to vaporise a tablet containing a synthetic pyrethroid in the room during the night. The burning of a mosquito coil is not as effective.Herbal remedies have not been tested for their ability to prevent or treat malaria and are therefore not recommended. Likewise, there is no scientific proof that homeopathic remedies are effective in either preventing or treating malaria and they are also not recommended.Antimalarial tabletsAntimalarial medication (chemoprophylaxis) helps to prevent malaria. The best medication to take depends on the country you visit. This is because the type of parasite varies between different parts of the world. Also, in some areas the parasite has become resistant to certain medicines.To find out whether there is a risk of malaria in any country you're visiting, and whether you need to take antimalarial tablets, visit the NHS Fitfortravel site.Be aware that antimalarials that you buy in the tropics or over the internet may be fake. It is therefore recommended that you obtain your antimalarial treatment from your pharmacist or a travel clinic.Pharmacists can now provide the full range of antimalarial medications, so there's no need to see your GP or practice nurse for a prescription. Medications to protect against malaria are not funded by the NHS. You will need to buy them, regardless of where you obtain them.  Feature   So now you can buy this medication over the counter, what might the benefits be? Well first, you should save some money. — Michael Stewart, Getting malaria tablets from your pharmacist The type of medication advised will depend upon the area to which you are travelling. It will also depend on:Any health problems you have.Any medication you are currently taking.The length of your stay.Any problems you may have had with antimalarial medication in the past.Whether you are pregnant or breastfeeding.Age (some medicines cannot be used in children).Names of medications which may be used are: Chloroquine (or hydroxychloroquine if you already take this for another condition).Proguanil.Doxycycline.Mefloquine.Atovaquone and proguanil combination.You should seek advice for each new trip abroad. Do not assume that the medication you took for your last trip will be advised for your next trip, even to the same country. There is a changing pattern of resistance to some medicines by the parasites.How to take antimalarial tabletsYou must take the medication exactly as advised. This usually involves starting the medication up to a week before you go on your trip. This allows the level of medicine in your body to become effective. It also gives time to check for any side-effects before travelling.It is also essential that you continue taking the medication for the correct time advised after returning to the UK. This will vary depending on the individual medicine but is likely to be between one and four weeks.Because of the way the parasite infects your blood, it can still be spreading in your blood several weeks after being bitten. It is important to take your medicines for the correct amount of weeks after leaving an affected country, in order to prevent this.Side-effects of antimalarial tabletsAntimalarial medication is usually well tolerated. The most common side-effects are minor and include:Headaches,Feeling sick (nausea).Diarrhoea.However, some people develop more severe side-effects. Therefore, always read the information sheet which comes with a particular medicine for a list of possible side-effects and cautions. To reduce possible side-effects, it is usually best to take the medication after meals.If you are taking doxycycline then you need to use a high-factor sunscreen. This is because this medication makes the skin more sensitive to the effects of the sun.A few people taking mefloquine may develop headaches or have problems with sleep (including difficulty sleeping (insomnia) or abnormal dreams). Mood may be affected.Note: medication is only a part of protection against malaria. It is not 100% effective and does not guarantee that you will not get malaria. The advice above on avoiding mosquito bites is just as important, even when you are taking antimalarial medication.Previous article   MalariaAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Guidelines for malaria prevention in travellers from the UK 2022; Public Health England Annual report, April 2023Malaria: guidance, data and analysis; Public Health EnglandNHS Fit For Travel: Travel health information for people travelling abroad from the UK; Health Protection ScotlandTickell-Painter M, Maayan N, Saunders R, et al; Mefloquine for preventing malaria during travel to endemic areas. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Oct 3010:CD006491. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006491.pub4.World Malaria Report 2023; World Health Organization, November 2023Malaria; NICE CKS, July 2023 (UK access only)Related InformationMalaria Prophylaxis ProMalariaMalaria in Pregnancy ProMalaria (Causes, Symptoms and Treatment) ProProguanil for malaria prevention (Paludrine)  Festival abroad? Have fun and stay safe     8 minutes reading time  26-Jul-23  Should you worry about side effects with malaria tablets?    7 minutes reading time  09-May-19  Getting malaria tablets from your pharmacist    5 minutes reading time  29-Sep-17  Hi All,  I dont know if anyone has come across this.  I have a worm infestation in my face.  They travel around under the skin leaving tracks and bursting holes into my skin.  they create glass like...   nicolamcJoin the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Hayley Willacy Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  4416 (v45)  Last updated on   16 January 2024 Next review date  14 January 2029 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  MalariaHealth informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Malaria Prevention: Antimalarial Medicine and Advice     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/travel-and-vaccinations/malaria-leaflet/malaria-preventionCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


