# Mastitis and Breast Abscess: Symptoms and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Pregnancy    Feeding Your Baby  Mastitis and Breast Abscess Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy  Last updated 19 Jan 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Feeding Your Baby      Breastfeeding Your Baby      Bottle-feeding Your Baby      Weaning Your Baby      Feeding Your Toddler In this series     Feeding Your Baby      Breastfeeding Your Baby      Bottle-feeding Your Baby      Weaning Your Baby      Feeding Your Toddler Mastitis is a painful condition of the breast which becomes red, hot and sore (inflamed). It is usually caused by a build-up of milk within the breast.In this article   What is mastitis?   Who gets mastitis?   Mastitis symptoms   Mastitis or blocked milk duct?   How long does mastitis last?   How is mastitis diagnosed?   Mastitis treatment   Mastitis complications   Some other points about mastitis In This Article     Mastitis and Breast AbscessIn this article What is mastitis?  Who gets mastitis?  Mastitis symptoms  Mastitis or blocked milk duct?  How long does mastitis last?  How is mastitis diagnosed?  Mastitis treatment  Mastitis complications  Some other points about mastitis Mastitis is a painful condition of the breast which becomes red, hot and sore (inflamed). It is usually caused by a build-up of milk within the breast (a blocked duct or engorgement). Sometimes it can be caused by germs (bacteria) that get into the milk ducts of the breast. This is often through a crack or sore in the nipple.What is mastitis?Cross-section view of breastMastitis is an inflammation of the breast, usually caused by a build-up of milk within the breast in women who are breastfeeding. It can be either:Non-infectious - when the build-up of milk irritates the breast tissue, making it become red, hot and swollen (inflamed).Infectious - when the build-up of milk becomes infected and the infection spreads to the breast tissue. The infection is caused by germs (bacteria) which may have come from the skin.If non-infectious mastitis is not treated, it can become infectious mastitis. You can't tell which type of mastitis it is from looking at it, and the treatment is the same.Anything which causes a build-up of milk in your breasts will make it more likely that you develop mastitis. Sometimes it occurs if you suddenly stop breast-feeding and the breasts become very swollen and sore because of the milk (engorged). This might happen if your baby starts to sleep through the night, or if you start using bottles for some feeds. If your baby is not feeding very well (for example, due to tongue-tie or illness) this might cause the milk to collect. Pressure on the breast due to a tight bra, or sleeping on your front, or wearing a seatbelt for a long time, may also be a cause. Breaks in the skin of the breast, such as cracked nipples due to your baby not latching on properly, can also make mastitis more likely. This is because the germs on the skin then have a route to the inside of the breast. Our picks for Mastitis and Breast Abscess Is breastfeeding for me? The pros and cons of breastmilk and formulaDeciding whether to breastfeed or formula-feed isn't an easy decision. For some, breastfeeding i...   5min  Is breastfeeding for me? The pros and cons of breastmilk and formula   5min  How to manage breastfeeding when you return to work   5min  Breastfeeding: What is colostrum and what are the benefits?   4min  How to help your baby sleep safely in hot weather   4minWho gets mastitis?You are most likely to get mastitis if you are a woman who is breastfeeding. It is sometimes called 'puerperal mastitis' or 'lactational mastitis'. It typically develops within the first few weeks of breastfeeding. At least 1 in every 10 breastfeeding women get mastitis, and it may be as many as 3 in every 10.Mastitis sometimes occurs in women who are not breastfeeding (non-lactational mastitis). Germs (bacteria) get into the milk ducts of the breast to cause the infection. This may be through a crack or sore in the nipple or from a nipple piercing but it can happen when you don't have any problems with your nipples. Smoking can be a trigger because nicotine damages the ducts in your breasts.Mastitis when you're not breastfeeding is less common. Between 5-9 women out of 100 may have it.Mastitis symptomsMastitis causes an area of hardness, pain, redness and swelling in the breast and makes you feel generally unwell. It often starts in a wedge-shaped section of breast. It usually occurs in one breast only.You also develop a high temperature (fever) and feel like you are coming down with flu. Other symptoms might include muscle pains, headaches and feeling tired and low.The most common symptoms of mastitis are:Hardness, redness, and swelling in the affected area of the breast.Pain in the breast.Fever (flu-like symptoms) and feeling generally unwell.Muscle pain.Headache.Fatigue.Mastitis or blocked milk duct?A blocked milk duct sometimes occurs in breastfeeding women. A blocked milk duct also causes a painful, swollen area in a breast. The overlying skin is sometimes red and inflamed, but it tends not to be as bad as mastitis and doesn't make you feel unwell.When you feed your baby, the pain may increase due to the pressure of milk building up behind the blocked duct. A blocked milk duct will usually clear within 1-2 days and symptoms will then go. However, in some cases a blocked milk duct becomes infected and develops into mastitis. So, some cases of mastitis develop as a complication of a blocked milk duct, but some cases occur without a blockage happening first.A blocked milk duct may clear more quickly if you feed your baby more often from the affected breast and gently massage your breast towards your nipple while you are breastfeeding.How long does mastitis last?If recognised and treated appropriately, mastitis should only last a few days.How is mastitis diagnosed?Mastitis is recognised from the typical story and appearance. The breast is sore and you may feel unwell or have a high temperature. When looking at the breast there is a tender, red, hard and swollen area. This is usually wedge-shaped.It can be difficult to tell if there is infection, but if you have a cracked nipple and pus is visible it may be more likely.What else might it be?Other conditions that cause a painful breast when you've just had a baby include engorged breast (when your milk first comes in) or a blocked duct.If you have a red, sore breast and you haven't had a baby, depending on the story and how the breast looks your doctor may also consider cellulitis (bacterial infection of the skin), fat necrosis (happens after an injury to the area) or breast cancer. Inflammatory breast cancer is a less common type of breast cancer and the redness is more likely to be spread all over the breast, rather than in a wedge shape. In addition, because of swelling, your skin may look dimpled like the surface of an orange.Mastitis treatmentEat well and drink lots of fluids.Avoid tight-fitting bras.Place a warm compress over your breast to help relieve the pain.Continue breast feeding.Regularly express milk from both breasts if you're breastfeeding.See a midwife or doctor if you have any concernsThe quickest way to get rid of mastitis is to continue breastfeeding. Mastitis may need to be treated with a course of an antibiotic. However, a mild case may get better without any medical treatment. If you notice a tender swollen area in your breast when you're breastfeeding, it may be a blocked milk duct or mastitis developing. It may be reasonable to 'see how it goes' over a day or so.Can mastitis be treated without antibiotics?Continue to breastfeed. This will empty the affected breast and it keeps the milk flowing, and stops the breast from becoming engorged and making things worse.Feeding from an infected breast does not harm your baby. If your baby swallows germs (bacteria) from an infected breast, the germs will be killed by the acid in your baby's stomach.Feed on the affected side first, so it will empty well, for the next two or three feeds. (However, don't let the unaffected side become too full of milk.)After feeding, consider expressing from the affected side as well. This is to make sure the breast is completely empty after a feed.Before feeding, massage your breast gently. Or apply heat with a warm flannel, or a heat pack or by having a warm shower.Ask your midwife or health visitor to check your breastfeeding technique and to check that your baby is latching on well.If it is too painful to feed from the affected side, express the milk from that side with a breast pump.Try to eat well and drink plenty of fluid.However, if your symptoms become worse you should see a doctor. After talking to you and examining you, they may prescribe an antibiotic. They may suggest that you wait 24 hours before starting the antibiotics, if your symptoms are mild or have only just begun. The mastitis will usually clear within a few days of starting the antibiotic.Mastitis complicationsOccasionally, an abscess may form inside an infected section of breast. An abscess is a collection of pus that causes a firm, red, tender lump. This is thought to happen to between about 3 and 7 women with mastitis, out of every 100. If this happens to you, you will need to go to hospital for treatment. As well as the breast symptoms, you may feel flu-like or that you have a high temperature (are feverish). If you suspect an abscess, you should contact a doctor. The pus in a breast abscess needs draining with a needle and syringe, or even with a small operation (called incision and drainage).The pus can be seen with an ultrasound scan. If the skin over the abscess is not broken, the pus can be drained with a needle and syringe by a doctor. If the skin is broken (or very thin) the doctor may need to make a small cut to let the pus drain out (called incision and drainage). You will probably need antibiotic medication as well.If you have a breast abscess you should not feed from the affected side; however, you should express and discard the milk to stop your breast from becoming swollen with fluid (engorged).Some other points about mastitisYour doctor will choose an antibiotic that is safe to give to breastfeeding women and which will not harm your baby.You can take simple painkillers (such as paracetamol or ibuprofen) to ease pain and reduce high temperature (fever). Cold packs can also be quite soothing when placed on the breast.Your baby may refuse to feed from the affected breast, as the taste of the milk may change a little. If this happens, feed from the other breast. Do remember to express the milk (that your baby has refused to take) from the affected breast. This will stop the breast swelling and becoming more painful. It will also keep up the demand for milk, so production does not slow down.Previous article   Breastfeeding Your Baby Next article  Bottle-feeding Your Baby  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Mastitis and breast abscess; NICE CKS, January 2021 (UK access only)The Baby Friendly Initiative; UNICEF UKPevzner M, Dahan A; Mastitis While Breastfeeding: Prevention, the Importance of Proper Treatment, and Potential Complications. J Clin Med. 2020 Jul 229(8):2328. doi: 10.3390/jcm9082328.Pileri P, Sartani A, Mazzocco MI, et al; Management of Breast Abscess during Breastfeeding. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 May 919(9):5762. doi: 10.3390/ijerph19095762.Zakarija-Grkovic I, Stewart F; Treatments for breast engorgement during lactation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 Sep 189(9):CD006946. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006946.pub4.Crepinsek MA, Taylor EA, Michener K, et al; Interventions for preventing mastitis after childbirth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 Sep 299:CD007239. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD007239.pub4.Related InformationPuerperal Mastitis Pro  Is breastfeeding for me? The pros and cons of breastmilk and formula    5 minutes reading time  24-Aug-23  How to manage breastfeeding when you return to work    5 minutes reading time  28-Jul-23  Toddler bedtime routine: how to get your child to sleep    6 minutes reading time  13-Mar-22  What are the benefits of baby-led weaning?    4 minutes reading time  04-May-23  I have an OBGYN appointment scheduled for the 13th but i have extreme health anxiety and have convinced myself this is cancer. I noticed a new vein on the underside of my right boob. It comes from my...   nichole03975Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy Document ID  4840 (v42)  Last updated on   19 January 2023 Next review date  22 December 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Breastfeeding Your BabyNext article Bottle-feeding Your Baby Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Mastitis and Breast Abscess: Symptoms and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/pregnancy/feeding-your-baby/mastitis-and-breast-abscessCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


