# Measles: Symptoms, Diagnosis, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Skincare and Conditions    Viral Rashes  Measles Last updated by Dr Toni Hazell   Peer reviewed by Dr Pippa Vincent  Last updated 26 Mar 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Viral Rashes      Chickenpox in Children      Chickenpox in Adults and Teenagers      Scarlet Fever      Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease      School Exclusion for Infections In this series     Viral Rashes      Chickenpox in Children      Chickenpox in Adults and Teenagers      Scarlet Fever      Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease      School Exclusion for Infections Measles is an infection that mainly affects children but can occur at any age. It is rare in the UK, due to immunisation. The illness is unpleasant but most children fully recover. However, some children develop serious complications.In this article   What is measles?   Measles symptoms   How is measles spread?   How do you diagnose measles?   What are the possible complications of measles?   Measles treatment   Measles vaccine   When to see a doctor? In This Article     MeaslesIn this article What is measles?  Measles symptoms  How is measles spread?  How do you diagnose measles?  What are the possible complications of measles?  Measles treatment  Measles vaccine  When to see a doctor? What is measles?Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGPMeasles is a highly infectious illness caused by a virus. The virus lives in the mucus of the nose and throat of people with this infection. Physical contact, coughing and sneezing can spread the infection. In addition, infected droplets of mucus can remain active and can be passed on by touching (they are contagious) for around two hours. This means that the virus can live outside the body - for example, on surfaces and door handles.Measles symptomsOnce you are infected with the virus, the virus multiples in the back of your throat and in your lungs. It then spreads throughout your body. The following are the most common symptoms of measles:A high temperature (fever), sore eyes (conjunctivitis) and a runny nose usually occur first.Small white spots usually develop inside the mouth a day or so later. These can persist for several days.A harsh dry cough is usual.Going off food, tiredness and aches and pains are usual.Diarrhoea and/or being sick (vomiting) are common.A red blotchy rash normally develops about 3-4 days after the first symptoms. It usually starts on the head and neck and spreads down the body. It takes 2-3 days to cover most of the body. The rash often turns a brownish colour and gradually fades over a few days.Children are usually quite unwell and miserable for 3-5 days. After this, the fever tends to ease and then the rash fades. The other symptoms gradually ease and go.Most children are better within 7-10 days. An irritating cough may persist for several days after other symptoms have gone. The immune system makes antibodies during the infection. These fight off the virus and then provide lifelong immunity. It is therefore rare to have more than one bout of measles.Some people mistake rashes caused by other viruses for measles. Measles is not just a mild red rash that soon goes. The measles virus causes an unpleasant and sometimes serious illness. The rash is just one part of this illness.How is measles spread?Measles is very infectious. It is passed on by coughing and sneezing the virus into the air. It takes between 7 and 21 days (most commonly 10-12 days) to develop symptoms after being infected. (This is the incubation period.) An infected person can pass it on to others from four days before to four days after the onset of the rash. Therefore, children with measles should not mix with others and should stay off school.What if I come into contact with someone with measles?Some people have not been immunised against measles and therefore are at greater risk of catching measles. Also, some people are more prone to complications if they get measles. In particular:Pregnant womenYoung babies under the age of 12 monthsPeople with a poor immune system - for example:Those on chemotherapy.People taking steroid medication.People who have certain illnesses which affect their immune system, such as HIV.If you or your child come into contact with someone with measles and you are in one of the groups listed above, or you have never been vaccinated against measles, you should see your doctor as soon as possible. You may be advised to have a blood test to check on your immunity to measles.And, if necessary, you may be offered immediate immunisation or a protecting injection of antibody (immunoglobulin). This is called 'post-exposure prophylaxis'. See the guidelines from the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) cited at the end under 'Further Reading and References'.How do you diagnose measles?Your doctor will usually be able to diagnose measles from the combination of your symptoms, especially the characteristic rash and the small spots inside your mouth. However, a simple saliva test is usually done to confirm the diagnosis.In the UK, measles is a 'notifiable illness', which means your doctor is obliged to inform the local Health Protection Team (HPT) for the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA). This is so that they can find out where you were exposed to someone with measles, so that spread of infection can be contained. The HPT may call you to arrange testing of other people with whom you have been in contact.What are the possible complications of measles?Suffer from dermatitis?Book a private appointment with a local pharmacist today to discover treatment options Book now Complications are more likely in children with weakened immune systems (such as those with leukaemia or HIV), those who are malnourished, children aged under 5 years and adults. Many malnourished children in the world die when they get measles, usually from a secondary lung infection (pneumonia). There are still occasional reports of children in the UK who die from complications of measles. These children have usually not been immunised.More common complications include:Eye infection (conjunctivitis).Inflammation of the voice box (laryngitis).Ear infection causing earache.Infections of the airways, such as bronchitis and croup, which can be common.Although these are distressing, they are not usually serious.Less common complications of measles are listed below:A febrile fit (convulsion) occurs in about 1 in 200 cases. This can be alarming, but full recovery is usual.Brain inflammation (encephalitis). This is a rare but very serious complication. It occurs in about 1 in 5,000 cases. It typically causes drowsiness, headache and being sick (vomiting) which start about 7-10 days after the onset of the measles rash. Encephalitis may cause brain damage. Some children die from this complication.Liver infection (hepatitis).Pneumonia. This is a serious complication that sometimes develops. Typical symptoms include fast or difficult breathing, chest pains and generally becoming more ill.Squint is more common in children who have had measles. The virus may affect the nerve or muscles to the eye.A very rare brain disease called subacute sclerosing panencephalitis can develop years later in a very small number of people who have had measles. This can sometimes occur several years after getting measles. This condition is always fatal.Measles treatmentThere is no specific medicine that kills the measles virus. Treatment aims to ease symptoms until the body's immune system clears the infection. For most cases, rest and simple measures to reduce a high temperature (fever) are all that are needed for a full recovery. Symptoms will usually disappear within 7-10 days.The following measures are often useful:Children should drink as much as possible to prevent lack of fluid in the body (dehydration). Ice lollies are a useful way of giving extra fluid and keeping cool.Paracetamol or ibuprofen can be taken to ease fever and aches and pains. You should keep the child cool (but not cold).Antibiotics do not kill the measles virus and so are not normally given. They may be prescribed if a complication develops, such as a secondary bacterial ear infection or secondary bacterial lung infection (pneumonia).Cough remedies have little benefit on any coughs.Vitamin A supplementsVitamin A supplements have been shown to help prevent serious complications arising from a measles infection. Supplements are generally recommended for children living in a country with a high prevalence of a vitamin A deficiency. This is rare in the UK but common in the developing world. Treatment with vitamin A may be offered to people with measles.Measles vaccineImmunisation is routine in the UK as part of the measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine. Two doses are usual - the first for children aged between 12 and 13 months and the second usually given at age 3 years and 4 months to 5 years. Immunisation gives excellent protection to prevent measles and so measles is now rare in the UK.However, unfortunately, measles is becoming more common again in children in some areas of the UK. This is due to some children not being vaccinated against measles as they have not receiveding the MMR vaccine. Measles immunisation can be given at any age and is sometimes offered to older children during outbreaks. Parents often refuse the measles vaccine because they mistakenly think that the MMR vaccine can cause their child to have autism. This suggestion, first made in 1998, has been categorically disproved and the doctor who suggested it was removed from the medical register and found to have significant financial interests in single vaccines, which had not been declared. It is very important that parents understand that if a child is not vaccinated against measles and they catch it, their life may be at risk.When to see a doctor?If you think you or your child may have measles, see a doctor to confirm the diagnosis. You should phone first because measles is so catching - the surgery may make arrangements so that your child doesn't wait in the waiting room and risk infecting other people. Most children recover fully with no complications or treatment. However, you should see a doctor again if symptoms get worse, or if you suspect a complication (see above).The main serious symptoms to look out for are:Drowsiness.Lack of fluid in the body (dehydration). This may be developing if the child drinks little, passes little urine, has a dry mouth and tongue or becomes drowsy.Breathing difficulties.A fit (convulsion).Previous article   Viral Rashes Next article  Chickenpox in Children  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Measles: the green book, chapter 21; Public Health England (last updated December 2019)Measles: post-exposure prophylaxis; Public Health England (May 2009 - last updated July 2019)PHE National Measles Guidelines; Public Health England (Aug 2017, updated 2019)Kabra SK, Lodha R; Antibiotics for preventing complications in children with measles. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Aug 148:CD001477. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001477.pub4.Measles; NICE CKS, October 2022 (UK access only)Related InformationMeasles ProViral RashesSchool Exclusion for InfectionsMMR VaccinationMeasles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine (MMRvaxPro, Priorix)  Why measles is on the rise    5 minutes reading time  16-Jan-24  Scarlet fever: a doctor's advice    6 minutes reading time  14-Dec-23  What to do when your child has a rash    7 minutes reading time  30-Apr-19  What is the difference between hand, foot and mouth disease and chickenpox?    5 minutes reading time  14-Nov-22  Hi All,  I dont know if anyone has come across this.  I have a worm infestation in my face.  They travel around under the skin leaving tracks and bursting holes into my skin.  they create glass like...   nicolamcJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Toni Hazell Peer reviewed by  Dr Pippa Vincent Document ID  4530 (v45)  Last updated on   26 March 2023 Next review date  14 March 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Viral RashesNext article Chickenpox in Children Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Measles: Symptoms, Diagnosis, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/skin-conditions/viral-rashes/measlesCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


