# Molluscum Contagiosum: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Children's Health    Viral Skin Infections  Molluscum Contagiosum Last updated by Dr Doug McKechnie   Peer reviewed by Dr Krishna Vakharia  Last updated 19 Sep 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Viral Skin Infections      Cold Sores      Primary Cold Sore Infection (Symptoms and Treatment)      Pityriasis Rosea In this series     Viral Skin Infections      Cold Sores      Primary Cold Sore Infection (Symptoms and Treatment)      Pityriasis Rosea Molluscum contagiosum is a common condition where small warty bumps (mollusca) appear on the skin. It is caused by a virus that can be passed on by skin contact or from contaminated towels, flannels, soft toys, etc. It is not serious and usually clears within 12-18 months without any treatment.In this article   What causes molluscum contagiosum?   Who gets molluscum contagiosum?   Molluscum contagiosum symptoms   How does molluscum contagiosum develop?   Is molluscum contagiosum serious?   What is the treatment for molluscum contagiosum?   How to prevent molluscum contagiosum In This Article     Molluscum ContagiosumIn this article What causes molluscum contagiosum?  Who gets molluscum contagiosum?  Molluscum contagiosum symptoms  How does molluscum contagiosum develop?  Is molluscum contagiosum serious?  What is the treatment for molluscum contagiosum?  How to prevent molluscum contagiosum What causes molluscum contagiosum?Molluscum contagiosum is caused by a virus, which can be passed on by skin-to-skin contact. People can also be infected by touching things that have been contaminated by the virus. For example, by sharing towels, flannels or soft toys that have been used by someone who has molluscum contagiosum.Once one area of skin is affected, the rash can spread to other areas of the skin. However, most people are resistant (immune) to this virus. Therefore, most people who come into contact with affected people do not develop molluscum contagiosum.Molluscum contagiosum in adultsIn adults, sometimes the virus is passed on during close skin-to-skin contact when having sex. If it is passed on whilst having sex then the first mollusca to appear tend to be on the skin of the lower tummy (abdomen) and around the penis, vagina or back passage (anus).If this happens, it's a good idea to get checked for other sexually transmitted infections. You can attend a genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic for tests and do not need a referral from your GP.Who gets molluscum contagiosum?Molluscum contagiosum can affect anyone of any age. It is most common in children and mostly happens in children aged 1-4 years. However, it can also (much less commonly) affect adults.People whose immune systems are not working as well as usual are more likely to get it. (For example, people with AIDS, or people who are having chemotherapy or steroid treatment.)Molluscum contagiosum symptomsMolluscum contagiosum causes small lumps (mollusca) on the skin, which are pearly-white or slightly pink. Each lump (molluscum) looks like a small swelling on the skin and is round, firm and about 2-5 mm across.A tiny dimple often develops on the top of each molluscum. If you squeeze a molluscum, a white cheesy fluid comes out. Most people have fewer than 30 mollusca.Molluscum contagiosumGzzz, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia CommonsGzzz, CC BY-SA 4.0 , via Wikimedia CommonsSometimes many mollusca develop over various parts of the skin. They tend to occur in groups or clusters. Any part of the body can be affected but it is rare on the palms and soles.How does molluscum contagiosum develop?The small lumps (mollusca) on the skin usually develop 2-8 weeks after becoming infected with the virus. Typically, each lump (molluscum) lasts a few weeks or months, crusts over and then goes.However, new ones tend to appear as old ones are going, as the virus spreads to other areas of skin. Therefore, crops of mollusca may appear to come and go for several months.For some people, the main concern is that the mollusca can look unsightly. Most children are not bothered by it.How long does molluscum contagiosum last?It commonly takes 12-18 months before the last of the mollusca goes completely. Occasionally, the condition lasts longer than two years - sometimes as long as five years.Is molluscum contagiosum serious?Molluscum contagiosum is usually harmless.The small lumps (mollusca) on the skin are not usually itchy, painful, or serious. A scar is not usually left when they go but sometimes a tiny dent or mark remains. In a few people the skin looks lighter in the places where mollusca have been.Occasionally, the skin next to a lump (molluscum) becomes infected with germs (bacteria). This can be treated with antibiotic creams or medicines. Rarely, a molluscum on an eyelid causes eye inflammation. (See a doctor if any eye symptoms develop related to a molluscum.)After an episode of molluscum contagiosum has cleared away, people are normally then immune to the virus, meaning it's very unlikely to come back.If you develop a very large number of mollusca (hundreds) or the mollusca are larger than normal, it could be a marker of an underlying problem with your immune system, which might require further tests.What is the treatment for molluscum contagiosum?No treatmentIt's usually best not to treat molluscum at all, particularly in children.This is because:The small lumps (mollusca) on the skin will usually go away without treatment within 12-18 months. Children with molluscum contagiosum can still go to school, do sports, swim, and all of their usual activities.Many of the treatments can be painful and distressing (such as liquid nitrogen).Some treatments have a risk of burning the surrounding skin.All treatments have a small risk of scarring the skin. Scarring rarely occurs if the mollusca are left to go away on their own.There is no really good evidence that any treatment makes a big difference to how long the mollusca last.Treatment options if neededThere is no convincing evidence yet that any one treatment works best.Sometimes treatment is wanted, if the lesions are particularly unsightly or troublesome, or if they are spreading very widely. You should discuss this with your GP.Treatment options include:Freezing the mollusca with liquid nitrogen (cryotherapy).Scraping the mollusca off, using a sharpened spoon-shaped tool (curettage).Creams and lotions may be used. Currently, we don't know which is the best one, or even if some of them have any effect at all. Options used include:Benzoyl peroxide.Hydrogen peroxide.Potassium hydroxide.Iodine preparations.Podophyllotoxin cream.Imiquimod cream. (Prescribed occasionally by skin specialists, particularly in people who have problems with their immune system.)Pulsed dye laser therapy. (Blasting the mollusca with special laser beams. Occasionally used by skin specialists.)If the skin around the mollusca becomes itchy or infected, your GP can prescribe creams for this.How to prevent molluscum contagiosumThe chance of passing on the molluscum contagiosum virus to others is small, and it is not serious anyway. Therefore, there is no need to keep children with molluscum contagiosum off school, or away from swimming pools, etc. There is no need for adults to keep away from gyms or other people.To reduce the chance of passing it on to others:Don't share towels, clothes, soft toys, or bathwater if you have molluscum contagiosum.Avoid skin-to-skin contact with other people (for example, by covering affected areas with clothing).A condom should be used during sex. This will not completely stop skin-to-skin spread but will reduce the chance of passing it on considerably.Try not to scratch the mollusca, as this may increase the risk of spreading the rash to other areas of the skin. Molluscum contagiosum can be passed on to other people (is contagious) until the last lump (molluscum) has gone.Previous article   Pityriasis RoseaAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Fernando I, K Edwards S, Grover D; British Association for Sexual Health and HIV national guideline for the management of Genital Molluscum in adults (2021). Int J STD AIDS. 2022 Apr33(5):422-432. doi: 10.1177/09564624211070705. Epub 2022 Mar 21.Molluscum contagiosum; NICE CKS, March 2022 (UK access only)van der Wouden JC, van der Sande R, Kruithof EJ, et al; Interventions for cutaneous molluscum contagiosum. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 May 175:CD004767. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD004767.pub4.Molluscum contagiosum; DermNet NZMolluscum contagiosum: images; DermNet NZBasdag H, Rainer BM, Cohen BA; Molluscum contagiosum: to treat or not to treat? Experience with 170 children in an outpatient clinic setting in the northeastern United States. Pediatr Dermatol. 2015 May-Jun32(3):353-7. doi: 10.1111/pde.12504. Epub 2015 Jan 30.Related InformationMolluscum Contagiosum ProAnogenital Warts (Causes, Symptoms, Treatment, Prevention) ProLocal Preparations for Anal DisordersHookworm Infections ProActinic Keratosis (Solar Keratosis) Sponsored  Can cold weather trigger cold sores?    6 minutes reading time  05-Dec-19 Sponsored  What to do when you feel a cold sore coming on    4 minutes reading time  21-Nov-19  Surprising facts everyone should know about cold sores     6 minutes reading time  01-May-18  Hey guys my molluscum came out i believe Nov 2019 not knowing what it was and recently got it treated with beetle juice last week. I called my dermatologist telling her the ones that were treated...   IdkidcccJoin the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Doug McKechnie Peer reviewed by  Dr Krishna Vakharia Document ID  4425 (v43)  Last updated on   19 September 2023 Next review date  17 September 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Pityriasis RoseaHealth informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Molluscum Contagiosum: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/childrens-health/viral-skin-infections-leaflet/molluscum-contagiosumCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


