# Our team of trusted health authors | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search Our team of trusted health authorsThe content on Patient is written and peer reviewed by our clinical content team, following The Information Standard guidelines.  Abi MillarBA (Hons), MAFreelance JournalistAbi is a freelance journalist with a special interest in health and medicine writing.   Dr Adrian Bonsall, MBBSMA (Chemistry), MBBS (Hons), DCHMedical AuthorSince 2000 Adrian has been employed in emergency and critical care paediatrics based in Sydney, with particular interests in toxicology, trauma and resuscitation.  Allie AndersonNCTJFreelance JournalistAllie Anderson is an NCTJ-qualified journalist with many years of experience writing and editing for a range of publishers.   Amberley AlmeyBA (Hons), CPDFeature WriterAmberley has been a feature writer at Patient for over two years.   Dr Anjum Gandhi, FRCPCHMBBS, MD, MRCP, FRCPCHConsultant Paediatrician, Medical AuthorDr. Anjum Gandhi has over 25 years of clinical, teaching and research experience in paediatrics and is a Consultant Paediatrician.   Dr Anna Cantlay, MRCGPBMBS, BMedSci, MRCGP, DRCOG, DFSRH, DOCCMEDGeneral Practitioner, Medical AuthorDr Anna Cantlay is an experienced NHS and private GP based in london.   Annabel KibbleANutrNutritionistAnnabel is a Registered Associate Nutritionist with a Bachelor of Science degree in Nutrition.   Ashwin BhandariAshwin was the Social Media & PR Executive at Patient.  The British Association of Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS)The British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS) is the professional body for Plastic Surgeons in the UK.  Dr Caroline Wiggins, MRCGPMBBS Honours (with Distinction), MRCGP (2016), MSc.SEM (with Distinction), Bsc.HonsGeneral Practitioner, Medical AuthorDr Caroline Wiggins is a GP locum currently in the South-West of England.   Dr Carrie Ruxton, PhD, Child NutritionPhD, Child NutritionDietitian and Health WriterDr Carrie Ruxton qualified as a Dietitian at Queen Margaret University, Edinburgh, before gaining a PhD in Child Nutrition.  Prof Cathy Jackson, MRCGPBSc (Hons) Physiology, MB, ChB, MRCGP, MDMedical AuthorProfessor Cathy Jackson graduated from Manchester Medical School having gained a first-class honours degree in physiology along the way.   Dr Claudia Berty, MRCGP  Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGPMBBS, MRCGP, MRCP (Paediatrics), DCHGeneral Practitioner, Medical AuthorDr Colin Tidy is an NHS GP, based in Oxfordshire.   Dr Dawn Harper, MRCGPGeneral Practitioner, Media DoctorTV's Dr Dawn has been an NHS GP for 23 years. She has been working as a media doctor for over twelve years.   Dr Doug McKechnie, MRCGPMA, MBBS, MSc, DRCOG, MRCP(UK), MRCGP(2021), FHEAMedical WriterDr Doug McKechnie is an NHS GP working in London. He works full-time clinically and is also the Deputy Lead for the Clinical and Professional Practice module at University College London Medical School.  Ellie SilkstoneRecipe DeveloperAs a lifelong food fanatic, Ellie is a big believer that having special dietary requirements shouldn't mean boring meals.   Dr Ellie Cannon, MRCGPGeneral Practitioner, Media DoctorDr Ellie Cannon is the resident GP for the Mail on Sunday and Mailonline and is well known as the on-screen GP for Sky News Sunrise and Channel 5.  Emily BashforthFeature WriterEmily is a Feature Writer with Patient, writing articles on a variety of topics relating to health and well-being.  Dr Gabrielle Macaulay, MBBSDr Gabi is passionate about creating a safe space for women to access individualised, integrity based healthcare.   Gemma GrangeBA (Hons), MAGemma joined Patient in 2017 as their Content Producer and now works for blood cancer charity Anthony Nolan.  Georgia GallantBA (Hons), MAGeorgia graduated from Bournemouth University with a BA (Hons) in Scriptwriting for Film and Television and an MA in Literary Media.  Gillian HarveyBA (Hons) EnglishFreelance WriterGillian is a freelance writer and columnist for a variety of national newspapers and magazines.   Ginny WeeksFreelance JournalistGinny Weeks is a freelance copywriter, lifestyle editor and consultant with over 10 years experience working across many different platforms.   Dr Gurvinder Rull, MBBSBSC (Hons), MBBS, FRCP, MA (Medical Ethics)Medical Author, Consultant: Clinical Pharmacology, Therapeutics and General Internal MedicineDr Gurvinder Rull qualified in 2000, joining EMIS’s content authoring team (now Patient.info) in 2007.   Dr Hannah Gronow, MBACPMB, ChBGeneral PractitionerHannah qualified as a GP in 1997. She joined EMIS (Patient) as a peer reviewer in August 2006.   Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGPMBChB (1992), DRCOG, DFFP, MRCOG (Part 1) MRCGP (2007), DFSRH (2013), MSc - medical education (2020)General Practitioner, Medical AuthorDr Hayley Willacy was an NHS GP working in northwest England, who retired from clinical practice in 2022 after 30 years.   Dr Helen Huins, MRCGPMB, BS, Lond, DCH, DRCOG, MRCGP, JCPTGP, DFFPGeneral Practitioner, Medical AuthorHelen qualified at Guy’s Hospital in 1989 and left London in 1990 to settle in the countryside.   Dr Hilary JonesGeneral Practitioner, BroadcasterDr Hilary Jones, GP, author and medical broadcaster, qualified at the Royal Free Hospital in 1976.   Dr Ian Wood, MRCGPDr Ian Wood is an active NHS GP and a Clinical Director at EMIS  Dr Jacqueline Payne, FRCGPMB, BS, DFFP, DRCOG, FRCGPGeneral Practitioner, Medical AuthorJacqueline was a GP in Kendal, Cumbria for 25 years, where she trained young GPs for the RCGP and was an Instructing Doctor for the FSRH.  Dr Jan Sambrook, MRCGPMBChB, MRCGPGeneral Practitioner, Medical AuthorDr Jan Sambrook qualified from the University of Sheffield in 1992.   Dr Jennifer Kelly, MRCGPMBChBGeneral Practitioner, Medical AuthorDr Jennifer Kelly is a GP and medical author for Patient.info.   Dr Jessica Garner, MRCGPGeneral PractitionerDr Jessica Garner is a GP and health writer and graduated from Medical School in 2002.  Dr Jo Seale  Joelle O'NeillDietitianJoelle O'Neill is a registered Dietician based in Leeds, West Yorkshire.   Dr John Cox, MRCGPMA, MB, B Chir, DCH, DRCOG, MRCP (UK), MRCGPDr John Cox worked as a Medical Registrar in the UK and New Zealand and as a locum Physician in New Zealand.   Julian TurnerFreelance JournalistJulian Turner is a freelance journalist and Editor of Compelo Energy.   Karen GordonNCTJFreelance JournalistKaren is an NCTJ-qualified freelance journalist with a special interest in health.   Karine Patel, RDRD, MScDietitian and DirectorKarine is a dietitian and the founder of Dietitian fit & co, a private dietitian company located accross England.  Kerry Taylor-SmithBSc (Hons) Natural SciencesFreelance journalistKerry has been a freelance writer, editor and proofreader since 2016; she specialises in science and health-related topics.   Dr Krishna Vakharia, MRCGPMBChB, MRCGP (2013), BMedSci (hons), DFSRH, DRCOG, PGDipDerm (Distn)Chief Medical Officer - Health, EMISDr Krishna Vakharia, is an NHS GP working in the northeast England. She is also a regular examiner for the postgraduate Diploma in Practical Dermatology at Cardiff University as well as being the Chief Medical Officer for health at EMIS with clinical oversight for Patient.  Dr Laurence Knott, MBBSBSc (Hons) Biochemistry, MBBSGeneral Practitioner, Medical AuthorDr Laurence Knott qualified in 1973 and has had extensive experience as a General Practitioner.   Dr Laurence Knott, MBBS  Lawrence HigginsManaging editorAs managing editor of Patient.info Lawrence looks after all our features, working with the clinical director to make sure everything is accurate, up to date and a great read. Lawrence's career includes writing speeches for the Prime Minister and being deputy editor on one of the world's leading business magazines. Lawrence lives by the sea and is passionate about the wellbeing benefits that being outdoors and in the water can bring us.  Prof Lesley Regan, FRCOGMD, DSc, FRCOG, FACOGPast President, Royal College of Obstetricians and GynaecologistsProfessor Lesley Regan is the Womens’ Health Ambassador for England and was President of the RCOG 2016 to 2019.   Lilly SabriBSc Physiotherapy, MCSP, MHPC, MAACP, MACSPMPhysiotherapist, Personal TrainerLilly Sabri is a chartered Physiotherapist, APPI pilates instructor, fitness, health and lifestyle influencer and founder of #LeanWithLilly.  Dr Louise Newson, MRCGPBSc (Hons) Pathology, MB, ChB (Hons), MRCP, MRCGP, DFFP, FRCGPLouise qualified from Manchester University in 1994 and is a GP and menopause expert in Solihull, West Midlands.   Lydia SmithBA MA MScSenior feature writerLydia Smith is an award-winning journalist and feature writer who has written extensively on women's health and mental health. She is currently studying for an MSc in psychology.  Dr Mary Harding, MRCGPBA, MA, MB, BChir, MRCGP, DFFPGeneral Practitioner, Medical AuthorDr Mary Harding qualified from Cambridge University medical school in 1989.   Dr Mary Lowth, FRCGPMA (Cantab), MB, BChir, DFFP, DRCOG, PG Cert, Med Ed, FRCGP, MA (London)Dr Mary Lowth was a Suffolk GP for 20 years, specialising in paediatrics and child protection, and later in documentation of torture.  Matt Binny  Dr Max Pemberton, MRCPsychPsychiatrist and media doctorMax Pemberton is a doctor, journalist and writer. He is based in London and works in mental health.   Michael Stewart, MRPharmSBPharm (Hons), MRPharmSMedicine Leaflet Review Manager – Contractor, PharmacistMichael is a community pharmacist practicing in the Midlands and South Yorkshire with more than 20 years’ experience advising on medicines and medical conditions. He has a strong background in healthcare training, having produced and delivered training courses for pharmacy teams and staff of residential care settings, including nurses. He has also contributed to pharmacy advisory boards for the management of low acuity conditions in the community.  Michelle WrightMB ChB, MRCGP, DCH, DRCOGGeneral Practitioner, Medial Author  Milly EvansMilly Evans was the Editorial Manager at Patient.  Dr Mohammad Razai, MRCGPBSc, BA, MBBChir, MA (Cantab), MRCGP (2021), FHEA, MA (Distn)General PractitionerDr Mohammad Sharif Razai is an award-winning interdisciplinary scientist, clinician and educator. He holds an MA and a Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery from the University of Cambridge, a BSc from University College London and an MA from Birkbeck University of London.  Natalie HealeyBSc (Hons) Biomedical ScienceFreelance journalistShe is a London-based health journalist who has been writing about science and medicine for several years. She is the former head of editorial at Patient.   Dr Nick Imm, MRCGPBM, MRCGP, DRCOG, DFFP, DTMHSurgeon Commander, Medical AuthorNick Imm qualified in 1993 and joined EMIS as a clinical author for Patient.info in 2013.  Noella Pio Kivlehan  Dr Nsisong Asanga, MPHDr Nsisong Asanga is a physician, editor and writer. Her work has appeared in WebMD, Amerisleep, VeryWell Health and other places. She tweets @Ncbassey.   Dr Oliver Starr, MRCGPMBChB, BMedSc, MRCS, MRCGP, DRCOGDr Oliver Starr is a general practitioner in Hertfordshire and an undergraduate tutor at University College Medical School.   Dr Partha Kar, FRCPMBBS, MD, FRCPConsultant in Diabetes & Endocrinology, Portsmouth Hospitals NHS TrustDr Partha Kar has been a Consultant in Diabetes & Endocrinology at Portsmouth Hospitals NHS Trust since 2008.   Dr Pippa Vincent, MRCGPMB BS, Bsc, MRCGP (2000), DCH, DFSRH, DRCOGGeneral Practitioner, Medical AuthorDr Pippa Vincent is an NHS GP working in North London.  Priya TewDietitianPriya is an award-winning dietitian with over 10 years of experience.   Dr Rachel Hudson, MRCGPMBChB, MRCGP (2008), BSc (Medical Science), DFSRH, DRCOG, DCHDr Rachel Hudson, is an NHS GP working in the North West of England.   Dr Richard Draper, MRCGPMB, ChB, DCH, DRCOG, MRCGP, DA (UK)General Practitioner, Medical AuthorDr Richard Draper qualified in 1981 and has worked 24 years in general practice, currently as a GP partner, Oxshott Medical Practice, Oxshott Surrey.   Dr Roger Henderson, MBBSMBBS, LMSSAGeneral Practitioner, Medical AuthorDr Roger Henderson qualified as a GP in 1985 and has authored for EMIS since early 2013.  Ros JonesBA (Hons) Applied Language StudiesMedical ProofreaderRos joined EMIS (now Patient.info) in 2009 as a clinical proofreader.   Dr Rosalyn Adleman, MRCGPMBChB (Hons) 2000, MRCP 2003, MRCGP (Distinction) 2005, BSc (Hons) Psychology 1997, DipGerMed 2011.Dr Rosalyn Adleman, is an NHS GP working in north London.  Rose Constantine SmithBSc (Hons), ANutrNutritionistRose has authored for several publications including The Healthy Food Guide and is a Nutrition and Wellbeing Manager for The Good Eating Co.  Dr Rosemary Leonard MBE, MRCGPMA, MB, BChir, MRCGP, DRCOGGeneral Practitioner and Medical JournalistRosemary qualified with double first class honours from Cambridge University, and after training in sexual health, obstetrics and gynaecology became a GP.  Ross DaviesFreelance JournalistRoss Davies is a freelance journalist.  Rowanna WatsonVegan Health Coach, AuthorRowanna Watson (AKA The Vegan Health Coach) is a Certified Holistic Health Coach.    Sally TurnerFreelance JournalistSally Turner is a writer and broadcaster specialising in sexual health and women’s issues.   Sara LindbergBSc (Hons), MScFreelance journalistSara Lindberg is a freelance health, fitness, and wellness writer.   Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGPMA (Cantab), BM, BCh (Oxon), DRCOG, FRCGP, MBEClinical Consultant,After training in medicine at Cambridge and Oxford, Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE became a GP.   Sarah GrahamMA, Newspaper, JournalismFreelance health journalistSarah Graham is an award-winning freelance health journalist, and founder of the feminist women's health blog Hysterical Women.  Sarika Mongia, RDRD, PGDipDietitian, weight management specialistSarika is a registered dietitian with over 20 years of experience and specialises in weight management and diabetes.  Simon Berry, MCOptomBSc (hons) MCOptomOptometristSimon Berry is an Optometrist from Durham.  Dr Suchita Shah, MRCGPMRCGP, MPH, MA (Cantab), MPhil, BMBch (Oxon), DCH, DFSRH, DRCOGGeneral Practitioner and Public Health SpecialistDr Suchita Shah is a GP, Population & Global Health specialist, writer, editor, and medical educator.  Dr Surangi Mendis, MRCGPMBBS, BSc (1st), MRCGP (2014), DFSRH, PGcert otology and audiologySurangi Mendis is a consultant in Audiovestibular Medicine and Neuro-otology at The Royal National ENT and Eastman Dental Hospitals, UCLH.  Prof Swaran Singh, FRCPsychMD, FRCPsych, DMHead of Mental Health & Wellbeing, University of WarwickSwaran Singh is Professor of Social and Community Psychiatry at Warwick Medical School.   Dr Toni Hazell, MRCGPMBBS, BSc, MRCGP, DFSRH, DCH, DRCOG, Dip G-U MedDr. Toni Hazell is an NHS GP working in a deprived area of London.   Torie TrueBEd (Hons) HistoryRecipe DeveloperIn 2009, after the birth of her second child, Torie True left the city and set up her food blog focusing on home cooking with herbs and spices.   Val StonesBaker, Recipe DeveloperVal competed on the Great British Bake Off in 2016 and quickly won the hearts of the nation with her homely bakes.   Dr Yassir Javaid, MRCGPMBBChir, MA, MRCP, MRCGP, DRCOG, DipCardCardiovascular lead Nene CCG, Primary Care Cardiovascular lead, East Midlands Clinical NetworkDr Javaid qualified from Cambridge University and completed his GP VTS training in Northampton. Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Our team of trusted health authors     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/authors?ReturnUrl=https://www.whitehatsec.com/Copy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


