# Panic Attacks (Panic Disorder): Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Mental Health    Anxiety  Panic Attacks Panic Disorder Last updated by Dr Suchita Shah, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP  Last updated 14 Jul 2022   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Anxiety      Social Anxiety Disorder      Generalised Anxiety Disorder In this series     Anxiety      Social Anxiety Disorder      Generalised Anxiety Disorder A panic attack is a severe attack of anxiety and fear which occurs suddenly, often without warning, and for no apparent reason.In this article   What is a panic attack?   Panic attack symptoms   What is panic disorder?   What causes panic attacks?   How to stop a panic attack   How to treat panic attacks In This Article     Panic AttacksPanic DisorderIn this article What is a panic attack?  Panic attack symptoms  What is panic disorder?  What causes panic attacks?  How to stop a panic attack  How to treat panic attacks What is a panic attack?A panic attack is a severe attack of anxiety and fear which occurs suddenly, often without warning. In addition to the anxiety, various other symptoms may also occur during a panic attack.Panic attack symptomsA 'thumping heart' or rapid heart rate (palpitations).Sweating and trembling.Dry mouth.Hot flushes or chills.Feeling short of breath, sometimes with choking sensations.Chest pains.Feeling sick (nauseated), dizzy, or faint.Fear of dying or going crazy.Numbness or pins and needles.Feelings of unreality, or being detached from yourself.The physical symptoms that occur with panic attacks do not mean there is a physical problem with the heart, chest, etc. The symptoms mainly occur because of an overdrive of nervous impulses from the brain to various parts of the body during a panic attack.This overdrive of nervous impulses can lead to the body producing hormones which include adrenaline (epinephrine). This is sometimes referred to as a 'fight or flight' response. This kind of reaction is normal in people when they feel they are in danger. During a panic attack the body can react in the same way.During a panic attack you tend to over-breathe (hyperventilate). If you over-breathe you blow out too much carbon dioxide, which changes the acidity in the blood. This can then cause more symptoms (such as confusion and cramps) and make a 'thumping heart', dizziness and pins and needles worse.This can make the attack seem even more frightening and make you over-breathe even more, and so on. Over-breathing may make you feel very light-headed and even lose consciousness for a brief period. However, losing consciousness when over-breathing is very uncommon.A panic attack usually lasts 5-10 minutes; however, sometimes panic attacks come in waves for up to two hours.What is panic disorder?At least 1 in 10 people have occasional panic attacks. If you have panic disorder it means that you have repeated panic attacks. The frequency of attacks can vary. About 1 in 50 people have panic disorder.In panic disorder, there may be an initial event which causes panic but then the attacks after that are recurrent and unexpected. If you have panic disorder, you also have ongoing worry about having further attacks and/or worry about the symptoms that you have during attacks.For example, you may worry that the 'thumping heart' (palpitations) or chest pains that you have with panic attacks are due to a serious heart problem like a heart attack. Some people worry that they may die during a panic attack. In panic disorder, you may also change your behaviour as a result of the panic attacks, in a way that affects you negatively (for example, only leaving the house if you have someone with you.)Looking for a counsellor?Video appointments with qualified counsellors are now available in Patient Access Book now What causes panic attacks?Panic attacks without panic disorder can occur for no apparent reason or be triggered by particular events or situations that are stressful. Slight abnormalities in the balance of some brain chemicals (neurotransmitters) may play a role. This is probably why medicines used for treatments for panic disorder work well. Anyone can have a panic attack.How to stop a panic attackTo ease a panic attack, or to prevent one from becoming worse, relaxation techniques and breathing exercises may help. Many people find that deep-breathing exercises are useful. This means taking a long, slow breath in through the nose, and very slowly breathing out through the mouth. If you do this a few times, and concentrate fully on breathing, you may find it quite relaxing.Some people find that moving from chest breathing to tummy (abdominal) breathing can be helpful. Sitting quietly, try putting one hand on your chest and the other on your tummy. You should aim to breathe quietly by moving your tummy with your chest moving very little. This encourages the lower chest muscle (diaphragm) to work efficiently and may help you avoid over-breathing.Taking regular exercise and meals, and avoiding caffeine and alcohol, can also help manage your stress levels and improve your mood and general well-being.How to treat panic attacksNo treatment is needed if you just have an occasional panic attack. It may help if you understand what panic attacks are and why/how they happen. This may reassure you that any physical symptoms you have during a panic attack are not due to a physical disease. It may help to know how to deal with a panic attack.Treatment can help if you have repeated attacks (panic disorder). The main aim of treatment is to reduce the number and severity of panic attacks.Self-help for panic disorderSelf-help, like books based on CBT principles (see below) or support groups, and the measures described above to help panic attacks, have been shown to be effective in treating panic disorder.Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) for panic disorderCBT is a type of specialist talking treatment. Studies show that it works well for over half of people with panic disorder (and agoraphobia) and is recommended for people with moderate to severe panic disorder.Medicines for panic disorderAntidepressants work well to prevent panic attacks in more than half of cases, even if you are not depressed. Symptoms of panic are thought to be associated with the production of brain chemicals (neurotransmitters) such as serotonin, and antidepressants are believed to interfere with the way these chemicals work. The group of antidepressants known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are a first-line choice. If SSRIs do not work, other types of antidepressants such as imipramine or clomipramine are sometimes used.A combination of CBT and antidepressants may work better than either treatment alone.Previous article   Social Anxiety Disorder Next article  Generalised Anxiety Disorder  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Generalised anxiety disorder and panic disorder in adults: management; NICE Clinical Guideline (January 2011 - updated June 2020)Anxiety disorders; NICE Quality Standards, Feb 2014Related InformationPanic Disorder ProObsessive-compulsive Disorder (OCD)AnxietyAgoraphobia ProObsessive-compulsive Disorder (OCD) Pro  How to spot the symptoms of social anxiety    9 minutes reading time  23-Feb-24  Sunday scaries: How to beat Sunday night anxiety    6 minutes reading time  21-Feb-24  The link between anxiety and insomnia     5 minutes reading time  28-Mar-18  How to manage social anxiety during Christmas gatherings    5 minutes reading time  08-Dec-23  The last year of my life has been a brutal one. At the age of 22, I am in the lowest of lows and I desperately need some help!Here’s my tale:About a year ago, a couple months after an extremely...   TaylorMasonJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Suchita Shah, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Document ID  4464 (v42)  Last updated on   14 July 2022 Next review date  13 July 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Social Anxiety DisorderNext article Generalised Anxiety Disorder Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Panic Attacks (Panic Disorder): Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/mental-health/anxiety/panic-attack-and-panic-disorderCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


