# Penis Problems (Itchy Penis and Penis Pain) | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Men's Health  Penis Problems, Itchy Penis, and Penis Pain Last updated by Dr Hayley Willacy   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 19 Jul 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Premature Ejaculation      Balanitis      Peyronie's Disease (Bent Penis)      Penile Cancer      Circumcision      Phimosis and Paraphimosis In this series     Premature Ejaculation      Balanitis      Peyronie's Disease (Bent Penis)      Penile Cancer      Circumcision      Phimosis and Paraphimosis There are a number of penis problems that can result in penis pain, an itchy penis or general penile discomfort. This article discusses some common penis problems and the symptoms to watch out for.In this article   What causes an itchy penis?   What causes penis pain?   Peyronie's disease   Hypospadias   Discharge from the penis   Lumps on the penis   Circumcision   Erection dysfunction   Penile cancer In This Article     Penis Problems, Itchy Penis, and Penis PainIn this article What causes an itchy penis?  What causes penis pain?  Peyronie's disease  Hypospadias  Discharge from the penis  Lumps on the penis  Circumcision  Erection dysfunction  Penile cancer What causes an itchy penis?An itchy penis is often due to a fungal infection such as thrush. This is also known as candidiasis. It can be a sign of diabetes mellitus but this most often has other symptoms too such as tiredness, excessive thirst and needing to pee a lot.Alternatively, penis itching can sometimes be a symptom of a condition called balanitis. This is the term used to describe inflammation at the head of the penis, which can also cause penis pain. The tip of the penis may also be red or sore. In addition, you may notice pain when you pass water or make love and sometimes bleeding or a smell coming from your foreskin, which usually develops over a few days.Balanitis can be caused by poor hygiene and infections picked up during sexual activity or sexual intercourse, such as genital herpes, genital warts and crabs (public lice). It can also be caused by infections not linked to sexual activity, such as thrush.Our separate leaflet on Balanitis has more information.Infections that can result in an itchy penis and affect the shaft of the penis include thrush, allergies or irritants, or as part of a more generalised skin problem such as psoriasis. Other skin conditions that can make your penis itch include contact dermatitis (where you come into contact with something you are allergic to, such as soaps or shampoo) and eczema.An itchy penis can also sometimes be a cause of a lower urinary tract infection in men (UTI), which can again be a source of penile discomfort and penis pain.A doctor can often diagnose the condition just by its appearance, but sometimes tests are needed. The treatment depends on the cause. Our picks for Penis Problems, Itchy Penis, and Penis Pain Penis problems you shouldn't ignoreChanges in the penis, testicles, scrotum and urinary habits can indicate something is wrong and ...   5min  Penis problems you shouldn't ignore   5min  Red spots? Fleshy bumps? When to worry about spots on the penis   5min  The male reproductive system  How erection problems can affect your relationship   4minWhat causes penis pain?There are several causes of penis pain which we discuss in more detail below. Causes of penis pain include:An injury due to a fall or during sports.Strenuous sexual activity.Penile fracture - force applied to an erect penis that damages the fibrous part of the shaft. There is no bone in the penis.Sexually transmitted infections.Non-sexually transmitted infections, such as yeast infections leading to balanitis.A paraphimosis, where the foreskin has been pulled back and gets stuck (this is a medical emergency).Peyronie's disease.Peyronie's diseaseIn this condition, thickened areas of scar tissue (fibrous plaques) appear along the shaft of the penis. As a result the penis can develop a bend or assume a deformed shape. The exact cause is unknown but there are several theories. With Peyronie's disease, painful erections and problems with penetration during sex are common.In most cases tests are not needed, but occasionally a scan is suggested if a blood circulation problem affecting the penis is suspected. The medical treatment includes:Medication that can be swallowed; orMedicines applied directly to the surface of the penis; orInjections into the areas of scarring.Other treatment options are available. In most cases, the condition stays the same or becomes worse, but occasionally it gets better with time.See the separate leaflet called Peyronie's Disease for additional information.HypospadiasYour urethra is the tube running from your bladder down the length of your penis, which your urine comes out of. Hypospadias is a malformation of the urethra and penis that some babies are born with. It can cause difficulties with the urine flow. In later life, there may be erection problems.There are a number of different forms. In mild cases, the urethra may just open lower down from its usual position. In severe forms, it can open right down at the base of the penis, by the scrotum. Other abnormalities of the foreskin or the underside of the penis may also occur.Tests are not usually needed unless it is suspected that the abnormalities of the penis are part of a wider disorder (such as 'intersex syndrome'). Treatment may not be needed for milder cases, but many patients require some form of corrective surgery. This is particularly true if there are problems with the direction of urine flow or erection difficulties.See the separate leaflet called Hypospadias for additional information.Worried about your health?Find a range of men's health services, delivered by local professionals today Book now Discharge from the penisDischarge from the penis is usually caused by inflammation of the urethra. The medical term is urethritis. You may notice a burning pain or urge to pass urine, but this doesn't always happen. Some men don't get any symptoms.Usually, the cause is a sexually transmitted disease or infection. The common causes are gonorrhoea and non-gonococcal urethritis (NGU). It's at its most common in younger men, especially men who have sex with men.As the name suggests, infections other than gonorrhoea can be a cause of NGU. Chlamydia, a germ (bacterium) is a common cause. Irritants to the urethra, such as soap, spermicides or putting a tube (catheter) in to drain the bladder can also be to blame. A cause can't always be identified.If an infection is the cause, it may go away without medical treatment, but this can take several months. You may still be infectious, even if the symptoms have gone.If you have a discharge from the penis, get checked out by your GP, a sexual health clinic, or a genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic. Don't have sex until you and your sexual partner(s) have been tested. Even after treatment, you must avoid sex until it's shown that any infection has been cleared by treatment.See the separate leaflets called Gonorrhoea, Non-gonococcal Urethritis and Urethritis and Urethral Discharge in Men for additional information.Lumps on the penisA common cause for these is warts, also called anogenital warts or simply genital warts. They look like little lumps on the outer skin of the penis. They also sometimes occur around the anus. They are caused by infection with the human papillomavirus (HPV). They are passed on by skin-to-skin contact. This is mainly during sexual contact, but can occur in other circumstances (eg, from mother to baby during birth).Warts on the penis usually don't cause any penis pain or symptoms but people seek treatment because of their appearance. It's best to visit a GUM clinic to get checked out for other infections.Genital warts are not cancers, but the risk of some cancers (genital and penile cancer, cancer of the mouth, throat and neck). HPV infection is linked to cervical cancer in women.The warts can be left alone, or removed by a variety of methods such as chemicals, freezing, burning, lasers or surgery. New warts develop after treatment in 1 in 4 cases, due to reactivation of the infection.Condoms - both male and female - help reduce the risk of acquiring genital warts but don't abolish it because of contact with uncovered skin. Sex toys can pass on the virus and should not be shared. A vaccine is now available against HPV infection which is offered to boys and girls aged 12 to 13 years.See the separate leaflet called Anogenital Warts for additional information.CircumcisionThis is an operation in which the foreskin is cut off and the remaining skin stitched back. It is usually performed for a condition called phimosis. Phimosis means tightening of the foreskin. This can result in difficulties in pulling the foreskin over the head of the penis and sometimes penis pain.If the foreskin is pulled back for cleaning or insertion of a tube (catheter) to drain the bladder, and it is not pulled forwards again, the head of the penis (glans) can swell. The foreskin can become trapped under the swollen glans: this is called a paraphimosis. It's not uncommon for this to result in penis pain.Steroid cream or an operation to loosen the foreskin can sometimes be used if it is not too tight. Otherwise, a circumcision is required.Sometimes a circumcision is done for religious or hygienic reasons. Other reasons include:An infection of the glans, called balanitis (see above).An infection of the foreskin, called posthitis.A skin condition called balanitis xerotica obliterans.See the separate leaflet called Circumcision for additional information.Erection dysfunctionThis is also called erectile dysfunction or impotence. There are 2 types of ED:You can't maintain an erection long enough to complete sexual intercourse; orYou're unable to get an erection at all.A lot of men have ED now and again, often as a result of stress or tiredness. It can, however, become a more persistent problem. Long-term ED is more likely to happen as you become older.There are many causes of persistent ED, including circulation problems to the penis, diseases of (or injury to) the nerve supply, diabetes, and lack of the male hormone (testosterone). Other causes include alcohol and recreational drugs, cycling, leakage of blood through the veins of the penis, and psychological causes.If your ED is due to a circulatory cause (as many cases are) you will need checks to make sure you don't have a more general problem with the state of your circulatory system, including your heart. These may include blood tests to rule out raised cholesterol and diabetes, a blood pressure check, and a heart tracing (electrocardiogram, or ECG). Your lifestyle will also be reviewed (eg, weight, exercise, smoking and alcohol intake).Treatment options will include removing any of the aggravating factors (such as excessive alcohol or stress); medication in the form of cream, or tablets that you swallow; and injections or pellets put in the urethra. Other options include vacuum devices or a rod inserted into the penis (a prosthesis).See the separate leaflet called Erectile Dysfunction (Impotence) for additional information.Penile cancerThis is also known as penile cancer. It is very rare, affecting 1 in 100,000 men in Europe. A cancerous (malignant) tumour grows from one abnormal cell. It is not known why this happens but certain factors are known to increase the risk. These include age (it is more common over the age of 50), becoming infected with the human papillomavirus (HPV), and certain rare skin conditions (eg, erythroplasia of Queyrat and balanitis xerotica obliterans).Poor hygiene in adults and having phimosis can increase the risk. Having a circumcision as a baby seems to have a protective effect.The first sign of penile cancer is an alteration in the colour of the skin either on the head of the penis (the glans) or the underside of the foreskin if you have not been circumcised. It never occurs on the shaft. Eventually, the whole of the glans and/or foreskin can become involved.You will probably need removal of some tissue for analysis (a biopsy) and some scans to confirm the size and spread of the cancer.Treatment options include surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy.See the separate leaflet called Penile Cancer for additional information. Next article  Premature Ejaculation  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Penile curvature; European Association of Urology, Sexual and Reproductive Health guidelines, 2023European guideline for the management of balanoposthitis; Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology, 2022Balanitis; NICE CKS, July 2022 (UK access only)van der Horst HJ, de Wall LL; Hypospadias, all there is to know. Eur J Pediatr. 2017 Apr176(4):435-441. doi: 10.1007/s00431-017-2864-5. Epub 2017 Feb 11.Snodgrass W, Bush N; Recent advances in understanding/management of hypospadias. F1000Prime Rep. 2014 Nov 46:101. doi: 10.12703/P6-101. eCollection 2014.Nam JK, Lee DH, Park SW, et al; Clinicopathologic Characteristics and Treatment Outcomes of Penile Cancer. World J Mens Health. 2017 Apr35(1):28-33. doi: 10.5534/wjmh.2017.35.1.28.Peyronie's disease; British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS), 2020Related InformationRed spots? Fleshy bumps? When to worry about spots on the penisThe male reproductive systemBalanitisHow erection problems can affect your relationshipPeyronie's Disease  Penis problems you shouldn't ignore    5 minutes reading time  25-Nov-19  How to prevent premature ejaculation    6 minutes reading time  04-Mar-19  The male reproductive system  Red spots? Fleshy bumps? When to worry about spots on the penis    5 minutes reading time  25-May-18  I have had this for a while now but have been too embarrassed to talk about it. I'm quite anxious about it. Does anyone know what this is?   jack-ellis55831Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Hayley Willacy Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  29854 (v3)  Last updated on   19 July 2023 Next review date  17 July 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Next article Premature Ejaculation Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Penis Problems (Itchy Penis and Penis Pain)     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/mens-health/penis-problemsCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


