# Perforated Eardrum: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Ears, Nose, Throat and Mouth    Hearing Loss  Perforated Eardrum Last updated by Dr Surangi Mendis   Peer reviewed by Dr Ros Adleman  Last updated 7 Jun 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Hearing Loss      Hearing Loss of Older People (Presbyacusis)      Glue Ear      Earwax      Otosclerosis      Cholesteatoma In this series     Hearing Loss      Hearing Loss of Older People (Presbyacusis)      Glue Ear      Earwax      Otosclerosis      Cholesteatoma A torn (perforated) eardrum is not usually serious and often heals in a few weeks on its own. Complications sometimes occur such as hearing loss and infection in the middle ear. A small procedure to repair the eardrum is an option if it does not heal by itself, especially if a perforation causes hearing loss.In this article   What is a perforated eardrum?   Perforated eardrum symptoms   When to see a doctor about a perforated eardrum   Perforated eardrum causes   What is the eardrum and how do we hear?   Perforated eardrum treatment In This Article     Perforated EardrumIn this article What is a perforated eardrum?  Perforated eardrum symptoms  When to see a doctor about a perforated eardrum  Perforated eardrum causes  What is the eardrum and how do we hear?  Perforated eardrum treatment What is a perforated eardrum?Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGPA perforated eardrum is a hole or tear that has developed in the eardrum. It can affect hearing. The extent of hearing loss can vary greatly. For example, small holes may only cause minimal loss of hearing. Larger holes may affect hearing more severely. Also, if the tiny bones (ossicles) behind the eardrum are damaged in addition to the perforation, then the hearing loss would be much greater than, for example, one caused by a small perforation away from the ossicles.With a perforation, there is greater risk of developing an ear infection. This is because the eardrum normally acts as a barrier to prevent bacteria and other germs entering the middle ear.Perforated eardrum symptomsThere may be no symptoms, or there may be symptoms associated with the cause of the perforation. The most common cause of perforation is infection.Possible symptoms include:Changes in how you hear, that may range from slightly muffled hearing to significant loss.Noises in your ear - ringing or buzzing (tinnitus).Aching or pain in your ear.Itching in your ear.Fluid leaking from your ear.A high temperature.Dizziness.The feeling of air coming out of the ear when the nose is blown - blowing the nose usually causes the eardrum to balloon outwards a little but if there is a hole, air will be pushed out of the ear instead.If your perforated eardrum is caused by a middle ear infection, you may have earache which suddenly gets worse when the drum perforates but then quickly improves or even completely resolves. This is because the perforation will allow pus to be released from behind the eardrum and relieves the pressure on the eardrum.The symptoms will usually pass once your eardrum has healed and any infection has been treated.When to see a doctor about a perforated eardrumSee your GP if you have symptoms of a perforated eardrum. They can usually confirm whether a perforation is present. If you have symptoms of infection, such as fluid leaking from the ear or a high temperature, antibiotic medications may be required. If you have hearing loss that does not improve over time, a hearing test or referral to an ear specialist may be requested.How is a perforated eardrum diagnosed?A doctor can usually diagnose a torn (perforated) eardrum simply by looking into the ear with a special torch called an otoscope. However, sometimes it is difficult to see the eardrum if there is a lot of inflammation, wax or infection present in the ear.If a hearing test is performed for any reason, for example, if there is associated hearing loss, a test of the middle ear known as tympanometry is also usually performed. This can confirm whether a perforation is present.Perforated eardrum causesCauses include:Infections of the middle ear, which can damage the eardrum. In this situation there is often discharge as pus runs out from the middle ear.Direct injury to the ear - for example, a punch to the ear.A sudden loud noise - for example, from a nearby explosion. The shock waves and sudden sound waves can tear (perforate) the eardrum. This is often the most severe type of perforation and can lead to severe hearing loss and ringing in the ear (tinnitus).Barotrauma. This occurs when there is a sudden change in air pressure, creating a sharp difference between the air pressure outside the ear and in the middle ear, for example, when descending in an aircraft or whilst scuba diving. Pain in the ear due to a tense eardrum is common during height (altitude) changes when flying. However, a perforated eardrum only happens rarely in extreme cases. See the separate leaflet called Barotrauma of the Ear (Stretched Eardrum) for more details.Poking foreign objects, such as a cotton bud, into the ear. This can sometimes damage the eardrum.Grommets. These are tiny tubes that are placed through the eardrum. They allow air to pass in and out of the ear to stop the production of fluid that causes glue ear. When a grommet falls out, there is a tiny hole left in the eardrum. This heals quickly in most cases.What is the eardrum and how do we hear?Cross-section of the earThe eardrum (also called the tympanic membrane) is a thin skin-like structure in the ear. It lies between the outer (external) ear and the middle ear.The ear is divided into three parts - the outer, middle and inner ear. Sound waves enter the outer ear and hit the eardrum, causing the eardrum to vibrate.Behind the eardrum are three tiny bones (ossicles). The vibrations pass from the eardrum to the bones of the middle ear. The bones then transmit the vibrations to the cochlea in the inner ear. The cochlea converts the vibrations to sound signals which are sent down a nerve to the brain, which we 'hear'.The middle ear behind the eardrum is normally filled with air. The middle ear is connected to the back of the nose by the Eustachian tube. This allows air to move in and out of the middle ear.Worried about earwax?Book a private earwax removal appointment today with a local specialist Book now Perforated eardrum treatmentNo treatment is needed in most casesA torn (perforated) eardrum will usually heal by itself within 6-8 weeks. It is a skin-like structure and, like skin that is cut, it will usually heal. In some cases, a doctor may prescribe antibiotic medicines, usually drops, if there is an infection or risk of infection developing in the middle ear whilst the eardrum is healing.It is best to avoid water getting into the ear whilst it is healing. For example, your doctor may advise that you put a large ball of cotton wool covered with petroleum jelly (eg, Vaseline™) into your outer ear whilst showering or washing your hair. It is best not to swim until the eardrum has healed.Medical treatmentOccasionally, a perforated eardrum gets infected and needs antibiotics. It is thought that some antibiotic ear drops can occasionally damage the nerve supply to the ear. Your doctor will select a type that does not have this risk.Surgical treatment is sometimes consideredA small operation is an option to treat a perforated drum that does not heal by itself. There are various techniques which may be used to repair the eardrum, depending on how severe the damage is. This operation may be called a myringoplasty (repair of the perforated eardrum only) or a tympanoplasty (repair of perforated eardrum and inspection of the middle ear bones, the ossicles). These operations are usually successful in fixing the perforation and improving hearing.However, not all people with an unhealed perforation need treatment. Some people have a small permanent perforation with no symptoms and no significant hearing loss. Treatment is mainly considered if there is hearing loss, as this may improve if the perforation is fixed. Also, swimmers may prefer to have a perforation repaired, as getting water in the middle ear can increase the risk of having an ear infection.If you have a perforation that has not healed by itself, a doctor who is an ear specialist can discuss options to help decide whether treatment is necessary.Previous article   Otosclerosis Next article  Cholesteatoma  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  British National Formulary (BNF); NICE Evidence Services (UK access only)Leis JA, Rutka JA, Gold WL; Aminoglycoside-induced ototoxicity. CMAJ. 2015 Jan 6187(1):E52. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.140339. Epub 2014 Sep 15.Illes K, Gergo D, Keresztely Z, et al; Factors influencing successful reconstruction of tympanic membrane perforations: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2023 Jun280(6):2639-2652. doi: 10.1007/s00405-023-07831-2. Epub 2023 Feb 22.Nicholas Jungbauer W Jr, Jeong S, Nguyen SA, et al; Comparing Myringoplasty to Type I Tympanoplasty in Tympanic Membrane Repair: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2023 May168(5):922-934. doi: 10.1002/ohn.191. Epub 2023 Feb 8.Ear, Treatment summary; BNF/NICERelated InformationEarache (Ear Pain)Hearing LossAcute Otitis Media in Adults (Causes, Symptoms and Treatment) ProAcute Otitis Media in Children  ProEar Infection (Otitis Media)  Anatomy of the ear  What's causing my hearing loss?    7 minutes reading time  10-Feb-23  How to protect against hearing loss while using headphones    6 minutes reading time  04-Feb-22  Can deaf people have therapy?    8 minutes reading time  06-Dec-21  Looking for advice for my 1 year old. Had chronic otis media since August. I just don't feel listened to by ENT or GP surgery. Hes had 9 rounds of antibiotics & 10 rounds of steroid drops. Nothing is...   eden35361Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Surangi Mendis Peer reviewed by  Dr Ros Adleman Document ID  4783 (v43)  Last updated on   07 June 2023 Next review date  14 April 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  OtosclerosisNext article Cholesteatoma Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Perforated Eardrum: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/ears-nose-throat-mouth/hearing-problems/perforated-eardrumCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


