# Pleurisy: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Signs and Symptoms    Chest Pain  Pleurisy Last updated by Dr Doug McKechnie, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP  Last updated 21 Apr 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Chest Pain      Costochondritis      Bornholm Disease      Pneumothorax (Trapped Air in the Chest) In this series     Chest Pain      Costochondritis      Bornholm Disease      Pneumothorax (Trapped Air in the Chest) Pleurisy is due to inflammation of the pleura next to the lung. It is most often caused by infection with a germ (a viral infection). In these cases the pain can be severe but soon goes. Various other lung disorders can also cause a 'pleuritic pain' similar to pleurisy.A pleuritic pain is a chest pain which is typically sharp and 'stabbing' in a part of the chest. The pain is usually made worse when you breathe in or cough.In this article   Pleurisy symptoms   When to see a doctor   Diagnosing pleurisy   Pleurisy treatment   What is the pleura?   What causes pleurisy?   Can I prevent pleurisy?   Pleurisy complications In This Article     PleurisyIn this article Pleurisy symptoms  When to see a doctor  Diagnosing pleurisy  Pleurisy treatment  What is the pleura?  What causes pleurisy?  Can I prevent pleurisy?  Pleurisy complications Pleurisy symptomsThe main symptom of pleurisy, or other problems that affect the pleura, is 'pleuritic' chest pain. This is usually a sharp stabbing pain.You may feel a pleuritic chest pain anywhere in the chest, depending on the site of the inflammation, or problem with the pleura. The pain is made worse by breathing in or by coughing, as this causes the two parts of the inflamed pleura to rub over each other.Other symptoms of pleurisyIf the inflammation of your pleura is caused by a more serious cause you are likely to have other symptoms. These symptoms include:Pain that develops slowly over several days or weeks.Pain that does not ease and go after a few days.Breathlessness (shortness of breath) or other breathing difficulties.Coughing up blood.Any other symptom that you are unsure of, or cannot explain.How long do pleurisy symptoms last?This depends on the cause. Pleurisy caused by a virus usually settles within a few days. If it's caused by something else, it can take longer.When to see a doctorSpeak to a doctor if you have symptoms of pleurisy. It can be difficult to tell if chest pain is due to something serious, so it's best to err on the side of caution.You should get emergency medical help. Call 999 (if in the UK), or go to your nearest Emergency Department) if you have:Severe chest pain.Coughing up blood.Breathlessness or other breathing difficulties.Diagnosing pleurisyThe most important thing when diagnosing the cause of a pleuritic pain is for a doctor to talk to you about your symptoms and to examine you. Most of the causes of the more serious causes of pleuritic pain will have other symptoms apart from the pain, as mentioned above. A doctor's examination may also show up some signs which may point to the cause.How do you test for pleurisy?A doctor may arrange tests such as a chest X-ray if you develop pleuritic pain and the cause is not clear. A chest X-ray is normal in the common infection with a germ (a viral pleurisy) but may show up abnormalities when there are some other causes of the pain. Other tests are sometimes done if a serious cause is suspected.How serious is pleurisy?This depends on the cause.Viral pleurisy isn't serious. It gets better after a few days and doesn't cause serious problems.Other causes of pleurisy can be serious. For example, major lung infections (pneumonia) and blood clots on the lung (pulmonary emboli) can be life-threatening.Pleurisy treatmentIf you have an infection with a germ (a viral pleurisy), take painkillers regularly until the pain eases. Your doctor may prescribe stronger painkillers if the pain is severe.If you have other causes of pleuritic pain, such as a serious lung infection (pneumonia) or a blood clot in the lung (pulmonary embolism), the treatment depends on the cause. Other treatments may include:Antibiotics, for bacterial lung infections such as pneumonia.A procedure to drain fluid from around the lung, if there is a collection of fluid there (a pleural effusion).Blood thinners, for a blood clot on the lung (pulmonary embolism).What is the pleura?Lungs and airways with pleuraThe pleura is a thin membrane with two layers. One layer lines the inside of the chest wall. The other layer covers the lungs.Between the two layers of pleura (the pleural cavity) is a tiny amount of fluid. This helps the lungs and chest wall to move smoothly when you breathe.General blood tests available nowGive yourself a check-up with a general blood profile, now available in Patient Access Book now What causes pleurisy?Causes of pleurisy include:Viral infection (the most common cause) - pain typically lasts a few days and goes as the virus clears away and the inflammation settles.Bacterial infection (commonly bacterial pneumonia).Fungal infection (more common in people with a weakened immune system).Blood clots in the lung (pulmonary embolism). This is the most common serious cause of pleuritic chest pain.Chest injuries.A collapsed lung (pneumothorax).Lung cancer.Inflammation associated with some forms of arthritis.Is pleurisy contagious?This depends on the cause. Although pleurisy itself isn't contagious, some of the causes of pleurisy, like viral and bacterial infections, are contagious. Others - like blood clots in the lung or lung cancer - can't be spread from person to person.Can I prevent pleurisy?It's difficult to prevent pleurisy completely. But there are some things that can reduce the chances of developing one of the causes of pleurisy, such as:Getting vaccinations when recommended (eg the flu vaccine).Hygiene, such as washing your hands after using the toilet, before preparing or eating food, before touching your face, and before and after caring for other people. This can reduce the chances of getting viral or bacterial infections.Avoiding or stopping smoking. Smoking increases the risk of lung infections and other serious causes of pleurisy, like lung cancer.Maintaining a healthy weight. Having overweight or obesity increases the risk of blood clots.Pleurisy complicationsThis depends on the cause of pleurisy. Viral pleurisy normally improves without any treatment. Other more serious causes of pleurisy, such as bacterial infections, can cause complications like:Fluid around the lung (a pleural effusion).Pus collecting around the lung with bacterial pneumonia (an empyema).A trapped lung that won't inflate fully (atelectasis).Sepsis, with bacterial infections.Breathing difficulties.Previous article   Bornholm Disease Next article  Pneumothorax (Trapped Air in the Chest)  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  British Thoracic Society Guideline for pleural disease; British Thoracic Society - BMJ (2023).Chest pain of recent onset; NICE Clinical Guideline (March 2010, updated Nov 2016)Reamy BV, Williams PM, Odom MR; Pleuritic Chest Pain: Sorting Through the Differential Diagnosis. Am Fam Physician. 2017 Sep 196(5):306-312.Related InformationChest PainChest InfectionBreathlessness and Difficulty Breathing (Dyspnoea)Breathlessness ProPulmonary Embolism  What causes pleurisy?    4 minutes reading time  19-May-23  What are the symptoms of costochondritis?    4 minutes reading time  18-May-23  What is the treatment for costochondritis?    4 minutes reading time  09-May-23  What causes costochondritis?    3 minutes reading time  18-May-23  hi, I would like some advice regarding exercises that could help improve lung healththank youCharles   charles99475Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Doug McKechnie, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Document ID  4495 (v43)  Last updated on   21 April 2023 Next review date  19 April 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Bornholm DiseaseNext article Pneumothorax (Trapped Air in the Chest) Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Pleurisy: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/signs-symptoms/chest-pain-leaflet/pleurisyCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


