# Premature Ejaculation: Causes and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Men's Health    Penis Problems, Itchy Penis, and Penis Pain  Premature Ejaculation Last updated by Dr Hayley Willacy   Authored by Dr Laurence Knott   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 30 Nov 2022   Originally published 2 May 2013   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Penis Problems, Itchy Penis, and Penis Pain      Balanitis      Peyronie's Disease (Bent Penis)      Penile Cancer      Circumcision      Phimosis and Paraphimosis In this series     Penis Problems, Itchy Penis, and Penis Pain      Balanitis      Peyronie's Disease (Bent Penis)      Penile Cancer      Circumcision      Phimosis and Paraphimosis Premature ejaculation (PE) is the term used when a man comes (ejaculates) more quickly than he and/or his partner would like. It means you ejaculate very soon after putting your penis inside (penetrating) your partner, or even before penetration. It is not really known what causes premature ejaculation.Men with premature ejaculation should not be embarrassed about discussing it with their doctor, as it can be helped by a variety of means. Many men do not seek help from their doctor for this problem so it is not known how common it is. Some studies suggest it can be as common as thirty in a hundred men.There are tablets which may be helpful, either taken regularly or as needed. Creams or sprays that numb the penis may also be used. Other treatments include certain techniques used during sex, and psychological treatments.In this article   How is premature ejaculation diagnosed?   What causes premature ejaculation   How to prevent premature ejaculation   How to treat premature ejaculation In This Article     Premature EjaculationIn this article How is premature ejaculation diagnosed?  What causes premature ejaculation  How to prevent premature ejaculation  How to treat premature ejaculation How is premature ejaculation diagnosed?Doctors use three features to decide whether a person has premature ejaculation. These are:Ejaculation occurs always or nearly always within a minute of penetration, and always has done since first having sex. (Or up to three minutes if it is a new problem which you have not previously experienced.)You feel you are always or have problems delaying ejaculation.You find sex frustrating or distressing and tend to avoid it, or the issue is affecting your relationship or your life.What causes premature ejaculationIt is not well understood what causes premature ejaculation and in most cases doctors do not know. Sometimes one or more of the following may be a cause.It is more likely to happen if you are young and in the early stages of new sexual relationships, in which case it often gets better with time.Factors such as anxiety about sex (such as performance anxiety) or your feelings during your first sexual activity may contribute to symptoms of premature ejaculation.Some medicines (eg, cabergoline used for the treatment of illnesses such as Parkinson's disease) can possibly cause early ejaculation.Premature ejaculation can be caused by some recreational drugs such as cocaine and amfetamine.Persistent infection or inflammation of the prostate gland (chronic prostatitis) is known to be sometimes associated with premature ejaculation.Hyperthyroidism and nervous system diseases, such as multiple sclerosis and peripheral neuropathy, can be a cause of acquired premature ejaculation.Is premature ejaculation common?Premature ejaculation (PE) is difficult to study because people may have trouble talking about sex as well as experiencing PE in different ways. This makes it hard to say accurately how many men have the problem. However it is widely accepted to be the most common male sexual problem and when studies have been done they estimate that between 3 men out of 10 worldwide may experience premature ejaculation.Worried about your health?Find a range of men's health services, delivered by local professionals today Book now How to prevent premature ejaculationYou may find that increasing the frequency of sex (either intercourse or masturbation) solves the problem. After one orgasm, it is normal for the next one to take a little longer. Some men find it helpful to masturbate first (with or without their partner) so it takes longer to have an orgasm whilst having sex.Wearing a condom reduces sensation and this may be helpful.Premature ejaculation is less likely if you have sex with your partner on top.You may want to try the 'squeeze method'. Just before ejaculation, the head of the penis should be squeezed for 1-20 seconds. Either you or your partner can do this. The squeezing is usually done during masturbation (stimulation) of the penis but also can be done by stopping during intercourse. The squeezing reduces an erection and delays your orgasm. The process must be repeated three times before having an orgasm. It requires a lot of practice.The 'start-stop' technique is similar but you simply stop the stimulation or the intercourse just before ejaculating. Wait for your erection to subside a little, before carrying on. Again, the idea is to repeat three times before having an orgasm. You need practice to recognise the moment just before an orgasm in order to be able to stop in time.Psychological treatment options are sometimes used in treating premature ejaculation but no one is sure just how effective they are.Studies have shown these techniques can be effective but results are very variable. You may prefer to try a cream or a tablet, as discussed below.How to treat premature ejaculationIf you have acquired premature ejaculation (because of another health problem, as above) the first goal is to treat that health problem.If you have had lifelong PE the current guidelines suggest that medication should be the basis of your treatment. The options are tablets and local anaesthetic spray.Behavioural and psychosexual therapy is also used but there is only weak and inconsistent evidence that this helps. Sometimes psychotherapy and medication are used together.Dapoxetine is a new SSRI tablet which has specially been developed for the treatment of premature ejaculation. It starts to work very quickly, so it can be taken just when you are going to have sex, rather than every day. You have to take it 1-3 hours before you have sex.If you don't want to take tablets, local anaesthetic creams and sprays are available which help to reduce the sensitivity of the penis. The medicines are called lidocaine or prilocaine and some options may be bought over the counter and some are available on prescription.Other selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants such as paroxetine, citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine and sertraline have also been offered in the past, but this is an unlicensed use of the tablet. You need to take these daily for at least one or two weeks to get the full effect and you may find they start to wear off after 6-12 months. They may also give you some unpleasant side-effects such as sickness and dizziness.Surgery has occasionally been helpful in men who have a short frenulum. This is the bridge of skin joining the head of the penis to the shaft. It is not a common treatment for premature ejaculation.Previous article   Penis Problems, Itchy Penis, and Penis Pain Next article  Balanitis  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Sexual and Reproductive Health Guideline; Disorders of ejaculation chapter. European Association of Urology (EAU), 2022Coskuner ER, Ozkan B; Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders: A Literature Review. World J Mens Health. 2022 Jan40(1):38-51. doi: 10.5534/wjmh.200184. Epub 2021 Mar 22.Premature ejaculation: Dapoxetine; NICE advice, May 2014Sathianathen NJ, Hwang EC, Mian R, et al; Selective Serotonin Re-Uptake Inhibitors for Premature Ejaculation in Adult Men: A Cochrane Systematic Review. World J Mens Health. 2022 Apr40(2):257-263. doi: 10.5534/wjmh.210155. Epub 2022 Jan 2.Related InformationPremature Ejaculation ProSelective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors ProErectile Dysfunction (ED) ProNarcolepsy and CataplexySocial Anxiety Disorder Pro  Penis problems you shouldn't ignore    5 minutes reading time  25-Nov-19  How to prevent premature ejaculation    6 minutes reading time  04-Mar-19  The male reproductive system  Red spots? Fleshy bumps? When to worry about spots on the penis    5 minutes reading time  25-May-18  I have been driving myself crazy trying to figure this out. I'm also super itchy. Not sure if it's from hair or dry skin. I'm having a mental health crisis over this. No insurance at the moment.   roxie06258Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Authored by   Dr Laurence Knott  Last updated by   Dr Hayley Willacy Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  28575 (v4)  Originally published on   02 May 2013  Last updated on   30 November 2022 Next review date  02 November 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Penis Problems, Itchy Penis, and Penis PainNext article Balanitis Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Premature Ejaculation: Causes and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/mens-health/penis-problems/premature-ejaculationCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


