# Preventing and Treating Bacterial Vaginosis | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Sexual Health    Vaginal Discharge  Preventing and Treating Bacterial Vaginosis Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy   Authored by Dr Mary Lowth   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy  Last updated 10 Feb 2023   Originally published 14 Dec 2017   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Vaginal Discharge      Vaginal Thrush      Treating Recurring Thrush      Bacterial Vaginosis In this series     Vaginal Discharge      Vaginal Thrush      Treating Recurring Thrush      Bacterial Vaginosis Bacterial vaginosis (BV) often causes no symptoms, or the symptoms are mild. Also, there is a good chance that BV will gradually clear without treatment.In this article   Bacterial vaginosis treatment   When should I get treatment for bacterial vaginosis?   What is the treatment for bacterial vaginosis?   Is yoghurt an effective treatment for bacterial vaginosis?   Are vaginal acetic acid treatments an effective treatment for bacterial vaginosis?   Are lactobacillus tablets an effective treatment for bacterial vaginosis?   Should my partner be treated for bacterial vaginosis?   Do I need a test to find out if my bacterial vaginosis is cured?   What is the treatment for persisting bacterial vaginosis?   Can bacterial vaginosis be prevented?   Will I get bacterial vaginosis again?   What can I do about recurrent bacterial vaginosis? In This Article     Preventing and Treating Bacterial VaginosisIn this article Bacterial vaginosis treatment  When should I get treatment for bacterial vaginosis?  What is the treatment for bacterial vaginosis?  Is yoghurt an effective treatment for bacterial vaginosis?  Are vaginal acetic acid treatments an effective treatment for bacterial vaginosis?  Are lactobacillus tablets an effective treatment for bacterial vaginosis?  Should my partner be treated for bacterial vaginosis?  Do I need a test to find out if my bacterial vaginosis is cured?  What is the treatment for persisting bacterial vaginosis?  Can bacterial vaginosis be prevented?  Will I get bacterial vaginosis again?  What can I do about recurrent bacterial vaginosis? Bacterial vaginosis treatmentBacterial vaginosis (BV) often causes no symptoms, or the symptoms are mild. Also, there is a good chance that BV will gradually clear without treatment. There are various different treatments for bacterial vaginosis (BV). There are also some things which you should avoid doing, which may help the problem to resolve itself.These include avoiding the use of douches, vaginal deodorants, bath additives and harsh soaps. Refraining from intercourse for a couple of weeks, or using a condom and a water-based lubricant, can be helpful.Bacterial vaginosis may not cause any symptoms or may cause a typical vaginal discharge (fishy-smelling, thin, grey/white discharge that is not associated with itching or soreness). There are may other causes of vaginal discharge, such as vaginal thrush (yeast infection). See also the leaflet on Vaginal Discharge for further information.When should I get treatment for bacterial vaginosis?The body is often very good at getting back its own balance. The disruption in the balance of vaginal germs (bacteria) that causes BV may correct naturally, with time. So, if you have no symptoms or only mild symptoms, you may not need any treatment, particularly if you take some of the general healthy steps above?You normally need treatment for BV if it is causing symptoms, or if the characteristic fishy smell is noticeable to you. If you are pregnant, trying to become pregnant, or about to have a gynaecological procedure then you may be advised to get treatment for BV.PregnancyIf you are pregnant and you are found to have BV then you will usually be offered antibiotic treatment with oral metronidazole (see below). Tinidazole is not recommended in pregnancy.If you are trying to conceive and you think you may have BV, it is a good idea to try to eradicate the BV through natural methods or treatment prior to conceiving. If you have symptoms then you should discuss having antibiotic treatment with your doctor.Termination of pregnancyIf you are found to have BV and are undergoing a termination of pregnancy, treatment with antibiotics may be advised even if you do not have any symptoms. This is because there is otherwise a risk of BV causing infection of the womb (uterus) or pelvis after the procedure. This could lead to later fertility problems.Gynaecological proceduresAntibiotics are not usually recommended for women with BV (and no symptoms) who are about to undergo 'minor' gynaecological procedures such as an endometrial biopsy - a biopsy of the lining of the womb. In fact women having these procedures are in any case not usually tested for BV, so they would not know they had it.Women having vaginal hysterectomy are given antibiotics prior to the procedure, even if they don't have BV, in order to lower the risk of postoperative infection. These antibiotics will also wipe out any BV-causing bacteria.What is the treatment for bacterial vaginosis?There are a variety of possible treatments for BV.Antibiotics for bacterial vaginosisMetronidazole tabletsA full course of metronidazole tablets is the common treatment. Metronidazole is an antibiotic. This clears BV in most cases. It is important to read the leaflet that comes with these tablets for the full list of possible side-effects and cautions. The main points to note about metronidazole include:The usual dose is 400-500 mg twice a day for 5-7 days. A single dose of 2 grams of metronidazole is an alternative, although this may be less effective and may cause more side-effects. (Note: this single dose is not recommended if you are pregnant.) It is important to finish the course you have been prescribed, and not to miss any tablets.Some people feel sick or may be sick (vomit) when they take metronidazole. This is less likely to occur if you take the tablets straight after food. A metallic taste is also a common side-effect.Do not drink any alcohol while taking metronidazole, nor for 48 hours after stopping treatment. The interaction of metronidazole with alcohol can cause severe sickness and vomiting, and may also cause flushing and an increased pulse rate.Metronidazole can get into breast milk in small amounts but will not harm your baby, although it may make the milk taste different. The manufacturer recommends that if you are breastfeeding you should take the 5- to 7-day lower dose course of metronidazole rather than the single large dose.Alternative antibiotic treatmentsMetronidazole vaginal gel or clindamycin vaginal cream placed inside the vagina can be used if you prefer this type of treatment, or if you experience unpleasant side-effects with metronidazole tablets. These treatments are believed to be almost as effective as antibiotics by mouth.Note: as with metronidazole tablets, you should avoid alcohol while using metronidazole gel and for at least 48 hours after stopping treatment, although the tendency of the gels to make you feel sick are not as noticeable as for the tablets.Vaginal creams and gels can weaken latex condoms and diaphragms. Therefore, if you are sexually active during treatment and for five days after treatment with clindamycin vaginal cream, do not rely on condoms or diaphragms to protect against pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections (STIs).Other antibiotic tablets taken by mouth are also sometimes used to treat BV. These are clindamycin tablets or tinidazole tablets. Tinidazole is not recommended in pregnancy.Is yoghurt an effective treatment for bacterial vaginosis?Some women with BV say that things settle more quickly and symptoms are eased by applying a thin coat of plain, live yogurt to the outside of the vagina daily, and by applying a small amount of plain live yoghurt on a tampon for internal use before bed.The evidence that live yoghurt is helpful in treating or preventing BV is mixed, with some trials saying that it is helpful and some saying that it is not helpful. Overall specialists feel that there is not enough evidence in its favour to suggest it over other treatments.Are vaginal acetic acid treatments an effective treatment for bacterial vaginosis?Treatment with acetic acid gels aims to keep the vaginal pH at less than 4.5, to encourage lactobacilli to grow, and to discourage anaerobic bacteria in your vagina from growing. Some studies have suggested that long-term use of vaginal acidifiers of this type reduces recurrences of BV. However, other studies suggest that this treatment, whilst harmless, is not effective.Get tested todaySexual health blood and urine profiles now available in Patient Access Book now Are lactobacillus tablets an effective treatment for bacterial vaginosis?Lactobacillus suppositories and oral tablets are sold in some health food shops, for use in BV.Orally consumed probiotics are believed to reach the vagina via the bowel. There is some evidence that this can be helpful in treatment and in prevention of BV. These studies suggest treatment needs to continue for at least two months. Other studies don't show a clear benefit. Overall, specialists feel that there is not enough evidence in its favour to suggest it over other treatments.Intravaginal lactobacillus treatment seems as though it ought to be an obvious solution - why not put the right bacteria where they are meant to go? However, results of studies on vaginal treatments with lactobacilli are also mixed, with some studies suggesting this treatment is effective and others not.Should my partner be treated for bacterial vaginosis?There is no evidence that treating a male sexual partner prevents his female sexual partner from developing BV. One small trial looked at whether using a sterilising alcohol gel on the penis protected their partners against BV - but the gel appeared to make BV more, rather than less, common in the women.If you have a female partner then it does appear that treating her for BV at the same time as you - even if she doesn't have symptoms - will prevent recurrence (in either of you).Do I need a test to find out if my bacterial vaginosis is cured?Women who are not pregnantAfter treatment, you do not need any further tests to ensure that BV has cleared (a test of cure) provided that your symptoms have gone.Women who are pregnantIf you are pregnant, it is suggested that you do have a test one month after treatment to ensure that BV is no longer present. A sample (a swab) of the discharge in your vagina is taken. This is tested to check you no longer have BV.What is the treatment for persisting bacterial vaginosis?If you have persistent BV (ie it does not settle down with the first treatment you try) then your doctor may want to take further vaginal swabs to check whether there is another cause of the discharge. They will usually suggest that you use the seven-day course of metronidazole if you have not had this before.Another treatment which may be tried is using metronidazole gel twice a week for up to six months.If you have a persistent BV infection which does not respond to treatment, and you have an intrauterine contraceptive device (IUCD) then your doctor may advise removing the device until things settle down, as there is some evidence that IUCDs can contribute to persistent BV.If you have persistent BV and a same-sex partner then treating both of you at the same time is likely to be helpful in preventing persistence and recurrence - even if your partner does not have similar symptoms.Can bacterial vaginosis be prevented?Most episodes of bacterial vaginosis (BV) occur for no apparent reason and they cannot be prevented. The following are thought to help prevent some episodes of bacterial vaginosis (BV). The logic behind these tips is to try not to upset the normal balance of bacteria (germs) in the vagina:Do not push water into your vagina to clean it (douching). The vagina needs no specific cleaning.Do not add bath oils, antiseptics, scented soaps, perfumed bubble bath, shampoos, etc, to bath water.Do not use strong detergents to wash your underwear.Do not wash around your vagina and vulva too often. Once a day is usually enough, using gentle soaps and water.Don't use perfumed 'intimate hygiene' products.Using a condom and/or a water-based lubricant during intercourse may help protect you.Avoid using sex toys inside the vagina.Avoid thongs and tight nylon tights.Have showers rather than baths.Lighter periods seem to make BV less likely to return, so if you have heavy periods and were considering seeking treatment, this might be another reason to do so.Will I get bacterial vaginosis again?BV often recurs, usually within a few months of treatment - although if any of the behaviours which can trigger it (such as using douches) apply to you then it may be less likely to recur if you avoid these things.BV often returns after it has been treated. No good way has been found yet of preventing this from happening.If you keep getting BV symptoms, your doctor will do some tests to be absolutely sure you have got BV and not any other infection. If it turns out to be definitely BV, a different antibiotic to the one you have taken previously may be tried. Occasionally regular preventative use of an antibiotic vaginal gel may be advised.If you are using an intrauterine contraceptive device (IUCD) for contraception, it may be advised that you consider having this removed.What can I do about recurrent bacterial vaginosis?If your symptoms come back and you did not have a test using a sample (a swab) of your vaginal discharge taken initially, your doctor or nurse may suggest that they take swab tests now. This sample of the discharge is to confirm that it is BV causing your symptoms.BV may return if you did not complete your course of antibiotics. However, even if you have completed a full course of antibiotics, BV returns within three months in many women. If it does come back, a repeat course of antibiotics will usually be successful. A small number of women have repeated episodes of BV and need repeated courses of antibiotics.If you have a copper coil for contraception - an IUCD - and have recurrent BV, your doctor or nurse may suggest that they remove your IUCD to see if this helps to improve your symptoms. You will need to consider alternative contraception measures.If you have a same-sex partner then, even if she has no symptoms, treating both of you at the same time may reduce recurrence.You should also take particular notice of the advice not to use douches, bath additives and vaginal deodorants. Long-term use of metronidazole gel is sometimes advised. Specialist guidelines in the USA recommend using twice-weekly for up to six months. UK specialist guidelines are less certain on the frequency and duration of preventative treatment, and your doctor may want to talk with a specialist for advice on this.Previous article   Bacterial VaginosisAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Management of bacterial vaginosis; British Association for Sexual Health and HIV (May 2012)Sexually Transmitted Infections in Primary Care; Royal College of General Practitioners and British Association for Sexual Health and HIV (Apr 2013)Management of trichomonas vaginalis; British Asociation of Sexual Health and HIV (Feb 2014)Bacterial vaginosis; NICE CKS, October 2018 (UK access only)Gonorrhoea; NICE CKS, August 2022 (UK access only)Vaginal discharge; NICE CKS, January 2019 (UK access only)Related InformationDyspareunia (Pain Having Sex)Bacterial vaginosis in pregnancy: What you need to knowVaginal ‘health gummies’ - Why the trend for improving our vaginas is harmfulClindamycin cream for bacterial vaginosis (Dalacin)Dyspareunia Pro  Tampon tests - the latest way to check your vaginal health    8 minutes reading time  26-Oct-23  What can cause a smelly vagina after sex?    3 minutes reading time  25-Aug-23  What your vaginal odour could mean    5 minutes reading time  16-Feb-18  What causes thrush?    10 minutes reading time  19-Apr-23  Last week I was told by a doctor that I have Bacterial Vaginosis and a yeast infection. I took 1 pill for the yeast infection, and metronidazole gel for 5 days at night. I just finished the medicine...   June_12Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Authored by   Dr Mary Lowth  Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy Document ID  29872 (v2)  Originally published on   14 December 2017  Last updated on   10 February 2023 Next review date  09 February 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Bacterial VaginosisHealth informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Preventing and Treating Bacterial Vaginosis     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/sexual-health/vaginal-discharge-female-discharge/treating-and-preventing-bacterial-vaginosisCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


