# Preventing Infection after Splenectomy | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Digestive Health    Spleen Pain  Preventing Infection after Splenectomy Last updated by Dr Toni Hazell, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP  Last updated 20 Mar 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Spleen Pain      Hereditary Spherocytosis In this series     Spleen Pain      Hereditary Spherocytosis If you do not have a spleen, or have a spleen that does not work well, you have an increased risk of developing some serious infections. The risk is reduced by immunisation, taking regular low-dose antibiotics, and taking full-strength antibiotics as soon as the first sign of infection develops.In this article   What can I do to reduce the risk of infection after splenectomy?   You should be immunised against the following   You may be advised to take low-dose antibiotics every day for life   Keep a course of full-strength broad-spectrum antibiotics handy   What is the spleen?   What is the risk without a spleen?   Travelling abroad?   Other general advice In This Article     Preventing Infection after SplenectomyIn this article What can I do to reduce the risk of infection after splenectomy?  You should be immunised against the following  You may be advised to take low-dose antibiotics every day for life  Keep a course of full-strength broad-spectrum antibiotics handy  What is the spleen?  What is the risk without a spleen?  Travelling abroad?  Other general advice What can I do to reduce the risk of infection after splenectomy?The following measures can be protective against infection after splenectomy.You should be immunised against the followingPneumococcusThis germ (bacterium) is a common cause of serious chest infection but can also lead to blood poisoning (septicaemia). A booster is normally advised every five years.Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib)This encapsulated bacterium can cause chest infections and meningitis and can also lead to septicaemia. Immunisation against Hib is now routine for all children. Many adults will not have had it, so you may still need it if you did not have it as a child.The bacterium called meningococcusThis can cause meningitis and can also lead to septicaemia. Immunisation is with the meningococcal ACWY conjugate vaccine. There are various strains of meningococcus. The meningococcal ACWY conjugate vaccine protects against four strains - A, C, W and Y. A vaccine against group B meningitis should also be given.Flu (influenza)The annual flu jab each autumn. The spleen is not needed to fight off the flu virus. However, some people with flu develop secondary chest infections from bacteria, which may lead to pneumonia. Therefore, it is best to prevent flu in the first place.Travel immunisationsIf you are travelling abroad, make sure that you have all the immunisations advised for the countries you visit. In particular, you should be immunised against Group A meningococcus if you are visiting certain hot counties where this is a risk. Also, see general information about travelling abroad below.Childhood immunisationsThey should have all the other usual childhood immunisations apart from a variation in the meningococcal vaccine. That is, the meningococcal ACWY conjugate vaccine should be given instead of, or in addition to, the group C meningococcal vaccine, depending on the age of the child when the vaccines are given.Your doctor will advise exactly which meningococcal vaccine should be used and when. A vaccine against group B meningitis will also be given. See the separate leaflet called Immunisation for more details, although group B vaccine is not routinely given to all children.If you are to have a planned operation to remove your spleen, review your immunisation status with a doctor at least two weeks before surgery. In particular, the pneumoccocal and ACWY conjugate meningococcal immunisations are best given at least two weeks before the spleen is removed.However, it is never too late. If you had your spleen removed in the past or you have been diagnosed as having a non-working spleen, and are not immunised, get immunised as soon as possible.Note: immunisation does not completely prevent the risk of infection. It only protects against certain types of infections.You may be advised to take low-dose antibiotics every day for lifeThis advice is usual for most people without a working spleen. If you take a small dose of an antibiotic each day, it will prevent some serious infections. Penicillin is the usual antibiotic prescribed. Most people do not have any side-effects from the daily low dose. If you are allergic to penicillin, other antibiotics are available.The risk of infection is at its highest in the first two to three years after having had your spleen removed. In some cases, doctors will review the ongoing risk with the patient, who can then make an informed decision as to whether they want to take regular antibiotics for life, or just for a few years.Keep a course of full-strength broad-spectrum antibiotics handyBroad-spectrum antibiotics combat a wide range of bacteria. If you become ill with a high temperature (fever) or other signs of infection, you should start a course of full-strength, broad-spectrum antibiotics straightaway. This is in addition to taking regular low-dose penicillin (or similar). You should then obtain medical advice quickly.Most feverish illnesses that you have will be common coughs and colds due to viral infections. These are not serious and will be cleared by your immune system. The antibiotic will, in hindsight, usually not have been necessary. However, some serious infections start with symptoms similar to a cold. They can then develop quickly if you do not have a working spleen. So, it is best to play safe and take a course of full-strength broad-spectrum antibiotics as soon as any feverish illness starts and see a doctor promptly.Why does a person who has had a splenectomy have an increased risk of infection?The spleen is an important part of your body's defence against germs (the immune system) and therefore if you don't have a spleen, you are at an increased risk of infection.What is the spleen?The spleen is an organ in the upper left side of the tummy (abdomen). It helps to protect against infections. As blood passes through the spleen, special cells kill germs (bacteria) that may be present. See the separate leaflet called Spleen Pain for more details about what the spleen does.Your spleen may be removed (splenectomy) for various reasons. For example, because of an illness that affects the spleen, or if it is damaged by an injury. Also, the spleen may not work well in some diseases - for example, sickle cell disease, thalassaemia, hereditary spherocytosis and lymphomas.Want to see a dietician?Book a private assessment with a qualified dietician today. Book now What is the risk without a spleen?You can normally cope with most infections without a spleen. The spleen is just one part of your defence (immune) system. Other parts of the immune system protect against most bacteria, viruses, and other germs.However, you have an increased risk of developing some serious infections if you do not have a spleen, or have a spleen that does not work properly. This complication is called overwhelming post-splenectomy infection (OPSI). The risk is small and OPSI is uncommon but very serious. It is often fatal if it occurs.Examples of serious infections that you are at increased risk from if you do not have a working spleen are:Pneumonia.Meningitis.Septicaemia.Malaria.Travelling abroad?If you do not have a working spleen and come into contact with germs causing certain diseases, you have an increased risk of developing these diseases. For example:Malaria.Meningitis.Babesiosis (an infection caused by a tick parasite, which leads to an illness similar to malaria). Note: a parasite is a type of germ that needs to live on or in another living being (host).It may be best to avoid any countries where these diseases are common. In particular, a severe form of malaria is a concern for people without a spleen. Do you really need to travel? If you do travel, make sure you are fully immunised. Also, obtain up-to-date information about protecting against the type of malaria in the country you are to visit. This will include taking tablets to prevent malaria, and using mosquito nets, insect repellents, etc.Take the antimalarial tablets exactly as advised for maximum protection. This usually includes starting the tablets before you travel. See the separate leaflet called Travelling to Remote Locations.Also, take a course of broad-spectrum antibiotics with you. Contact your doctor before travelling. A change to a different regular antibiotic for the duration of the trip may also be advised, depending on which country you visit. This is because in some countries (for example, Spain) there is a high resistance to penicillin by some bacteria.Other general adviceAnimal and tick bitesThese carry a risk of infection getting into the bloodstream. Take a course of full-strength broad-spectrum antibiotics after a bite, no matter how trivial. Also, consult a doctor urgently if you become ill after any bite. To help prevent tick bites whilst out in the countryside, wear clothing to cover exposed skin, especially long trousers to cover your legs.Make it knownConsider carrying a card or wearing a special bracelet or similar which says that you do not have a working spleen. This would alert a doctor to take rapid action if you are seriously ill and cannot tell him or her yourself.Previous article   Spleen Pain Next article  Hereditary Spherocytosis  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Review of guidelines for the prevention and treatment of infections in patients with an absent or dysfunctional spleen; British Committee for Standards in Haematology (2011)Immunisation against infectious disease - the Green Book (latest edition); UK Health Security Agency.Related InformationSplenectomy and Hyposplenism ProSpleen PainSplenomegaly and Hypersplenism Pro  I lost my spleen due to a colonscopy where my spleen was ruptured. I feel it has unfortunately changed my life in a negative way. I now live with anxiety, always worrying if a slight chill, a tooth...   bbakerJoin the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Toni Hazell, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Document ID  4427 (v43)  Last updated on   20 March 2023 Next review date  18 March 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Spleen PainNext article Hereditary Spherocytosis Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Preventing Infection after Splenectomy     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/digestive-health/spleen-pain/preventing-infection-after-splenectomyCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


