# Probiotics and Prebiotics: What's the Difference? | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Digestive Health    Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)  Probiotics and Prebiotics Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy   Peer reviewed by Dr Krishna Vakharia  Last updated 24 May 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)      Trapped Wind, Gas and Bloating      Bile Acid Diarrhoea      Antispasmodics In this series     Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)      Trapped Wind, Gas and Bloating      Bile Acid Diarrhoea      Antispasmodics Probiotics are microscopic, live organisms (microbes) that, if you swallow in large enough amounts, are good for your gut health.Prebiotics are foods that help to increase the numbers and activity of healthy microbes in your gut.In this article   What is a probiotic?   What is a prebiotic?   What is a synbiotic?   How do probiotics and prebiotics improve your health?   Probiotics for diarrhoea caused by antibiotics   Probiotics for irritable bowel syndrome   Probiotics for children   Probiotics for women   Probiotics and weight loss   Probiotics and cancer   Are probiotics and prebiotics safe? In This Article     Probiotics and PrebioticsIn this article What is a probiotic?  What is a prebiotic?  What is a synbiotic?  How do probiotics and prebiotics improve your health?  Probiotics for diarrhoea caused by antibiotics  Probiotics for irritable bowel syndrome  Probiotics for children  Probiotics for women  Probiotics and weight loss  Probiotics and cancer  Are probiotics and prebiotics safe? What is a probiotic?There are trillions of microscopic organisms in your gut (digestive system), especially the last part of the gut, the large intestine (colon). They are important for your health. They are sometimes called 'healthy', 'good' or 'friendly' bacteria. They rely on what we eat and drink to grow and to increase in number.Probiotics are medicines, food that has been fermented or food supplements that contain these bacteria. The best known are called lactic acid bacteria (LAB) and bifidobacteria. However, there are others, including a yeast and other bacteria. They are being added to some foods, such as yoghurts, and are also available as capsules, tablets and sachets, and even sprays.Probiotics are live cultures of bacteria but are not usually harmful. They aren't killed by being stored (as long as they are stored properly) and they can survive the journey through the stomach without being killed by stomach acid.LABs are used for preserving food by fermenting it, such as in yoghurt, kefir, sauerkraut and kimchi.What is a prebiotic?Prebiotics are foods that your body can't breakdown and absorb (digest). They encourage the growth and activity of healthy gut microbes. By doing this they may improve your health.Common prebiotics:Oligofructose and inulin: found in foods such as wheat, onions, asparagus, bananas, garlic and leeks. Extracted industrially, mainly from chicory root, or manufactured from sucrose.Galacto-oligosaccharides: produced commercially from lactose, a by-product of the dairy industry.Lactulose: a medicine used in the treatment of constipation and severe liver disease. Also produced from lactose.Breast milk oligosaccharides: may be one of the factors that protects breastfed infants from gut infections that cause diarrhoea.Most prebiotics are food ingredients found, for example, in biscuits, cereals and dairy products. They are used to improve the mouth-feel and acceptability of low-fat foods and to sweeten low-calorie foods.What is a synbiotic?Synbiotic is the word for a product that contains both a probiotic and a prebiotic.How do probiotics and prebiotics improve your health?Many bacteria, fungi and viruses naturally live on our skin and inside us, including in both small intestinal and in the large intestine (colon). They contribute in big ways to human health and wellness, such as protecting us against infections, maintaining healthy immune systems, and improving food digestion.Probiotics have several proven effects:They increase the numbers of 'healthy' organisms in your gut (digestive tract) and reduce the numbers of the organisms that could be harmful.They strengthen the barrier in the gut to harmful substances.They promote a more healthy immune system in the gut which might make it more sensitive.They help our bodies to absorb important nutrients from the gut, such as short chain fatty acids.They lessen the amount of inflammation in the gut, although the significance of this is not fully understood.They reduce the number of episodes and severity of diarrhoea - this is the main reason that probiotics are prescribed.However, many claims are made for the health benefits from taking probiotics and prebiotics, which are not supported by evidence. In several countries manufacturers of probiotic-containing yoghurt have had to drop exaggerated claims that it boosted immunity and aided 'intestinal rhythm'. The worldwide probiotic market was said to be worth US$35 billion in 2015 and is expected to grow rapidly in the coming years.Want to see a dietician?Book a private assessment with a qualified dietician today. Book now Probiotics for diarrhoea caused by antibioticsOne of the side-effects of some antibiotics is diarrhoea, caused by removing all the healthy bacteria in your gut - so-called antibiotic-associated diarrhoea. The most severe type of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea is due to a germ (bacterium) called Clostridium difficile (often shortened to C. diff).C. diff can thrive and multiply when the healthy gut microbes have been removed. There is good evidence that probiotics can prevent antibiotic-associated diarrhoea in children and adults who are taking antibiotics. There is also good evidence that they prevent C. diff-associated diarrhoea, although the best strain and the best dose are not yet known.See the separate leaflet called Clostridium Difficile (C. Diff) for more information about this condition.Probiotics for irritable bowel syndromeIrritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a very common condition that causes frequent attacks of tummy pain, bloating and either constipation or diarrhoea. Probiotics have been shown to be an effective treatment for IBS, although it isn't clear which strain of probiotic or what dose works best.See the separate leaflet called Irritable Bowel Syndrome for more information.Probiotics for childrenDo probiotics prevent colds and stomach bugs in children who go to nursery?There is some research that suggests probiotics might reduce the number of 'coughs and colds' (respiratory tract infections) in children who attend day nursery but the research isn't very convincing and is only for LABs. There is no evidence that probiotics can prevent stomach bugs in young children.Do probiotics prevent allergy in children?They are not recommended to prevent allergies. This is because, although probiotics taken by the mother when she is pregnant and by the baby once born may reduce the chances of developing atopic eczema, they may also increase the risk of developing wheezing and allergic rhinitis.Do probiotics help in the treatment of diarrhoea in children?Yes. In research that included almost 2,500 children, treatment with a specific type of LAB probiotic (in addition to normal treatment) was shown to shorten the number of days that a child had diarrhoea for by a day.See the separate leaflet called Acute Diarrhoea in Children for more information.Do probiotics help children with tummy pain?Tummy (abdominal) pain is very common in children and they can sometimes get it repeatedly. It isn't clear whether or not probiotics might help, as so far the research isn't of good enough quality.See the separate leaflet called Recurrent Abdominal Pain in Children for more information on this problem.Do probiotics help in baby colic?There is some research that suggests a particular type of LAB (Lactobacillus reuteri DSM 17938) may help with the treatment of a baby who gets colic, but only if they are fully breastfed. There is very little research on using probiotics to prevent colic.See the separate leaflet called Baby Colic for more information.Probiotics for womenDo probiotics treat or prevent vaginal infections?Bacterial vaginosis (BV) and vaginal thrush are the two most common infections that women can get in their vagina. Researchers are looking at whether using probiotics (either swallowing them or using them internally put into the vagina) might be effective in treating or preventing these infections. Both of these infections depend on the normal microbes that live in the vagina being reduced, so it is possible that probiotics might help but so far the results are unclear.You can read more about both of these conditions in our separate leaflets called Bacterial Vaginosis and Vaginal Thrush (Yeast Infection).Do probiotics prevent urine infections (cystitis)?Many women will have a urine infection at some time in their lives but a few women will get one again and again. There are studies looking at whether probiotics might reduce the chance of having a recurrent urine infection but unfortunately the studies are of poor quality. The authors of a review published in 2015 concluded that a benefit could not be ruled out.See the separate leaflet called Recurrent Cystitis in Women for more information.Probiotics in pregnancyWomen of childbearing age are one of the most common groups to take probiotics and prebiotics as food supplements. In the Netherlands, almost one woman in every seven pregnant women takes them.It has been suggested that probiotics might reduce the chances of having a baby who is born too early (premature labour). Unfortunately, this has not been proven and research has shown that probiotics and prebiotics neither increase or lessen the risk of having a premature labour, nor affect any other events of pregnancy.Probiotics have also been taken by pregnant women to reduce the risk of their baby developing allergies. As explained above, this is not recommended.Probiotics and weight lossIf you are overweight or obese this can be for many different reasons but overall it is due to having taken in more energy, in the form of food and drink, than you have used up by being active. However, researchers have identified a link between the microbes in a person's gut and the likelihood that they are overweight or obese.What is not clear though is whether the different gut microbes are the cause of the weight gain or just the result of the diet that itself caused the weight gain. So, will probiotics help you to lose weight? For the moment, the answer is no, probably not.You can read more about how to lose weight in the separate leaflet called Weight Loss (Weight Reduction).Probiotics and cancerCancer of the colon is a very common cancer that may be linked to our diet. Researchers have suggested that probiotics and prebiotics might help prevent colon cancer but so far the research proving this is very limited.Diarrhoea is a common side-effect of radiation to the tummy (abdomen) used to treat some cancers. Probiotics may be helpful in preventing and treating this effect of radiotherapy on the gut.Are probiotics and prebiotics safe?It is important to know that no research has been done specifically to look at the safety of probiotics and prebiotics. However, in general, both probiotics and prebiotics are considered safe, except in rare situations such as when someone is critically ill or for a premature baby.There are some concerns that probiotics may help bacteria to develop resistance to antibiotics, and the long-term safety of probiotics is not known.The quality of probiotics depends on the manufacturer and, since most are not manufactured as medicines, they do not have to satisfy the much stricter criteria for the regulatory standards of medicines. There are concerns regarding many commercially available products - a review showed several problems:Products were often mislabelled and did not contain the strain of microbe they were said to contain.Some contained potentially harmful microbes.Quantities of live microbes were so low in some products that they could not have any effect.This issue needs to be resolved by the regulatory agencies.Note: you can't assume that probiotic foods, such as yoghurts, and food supplements bought in the shops will have the same effects as the probiotics used in the studies discussed above, which used medicine-grade probiotics of specific strains and doses.Previous article   AntispasmodicsAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Probiotics and prebiotics; World Gastroenterology Organisation, Global Guidelines (2017)ESPCG Practical Reference Guide: Probiotics in the management of lower GI symptoms in clinical practice; The European Society for Primary Care Gastroenterology, 2013Gibson GR, Hutkins R, Sanders ME, et al; Expert consensus document: The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) consensus statement on the definition and scope of prebiotics. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017 Aug14(8):491-502. doi: 10.1038/nrgastro.2017.75. Epub 2017 Jun 14.Hojsak I, Fabiano V, Pop TL, et al; Guidance on the use of probiotics in clinical practice in children with selected clinical conditions and in specific vulnerable groups. Acta Paediatr. 2018 Jun107(6):927-937. doi: 10.1111/apa.14270. Epub 2018 Apr 16.Jarde A, Lewis-Mikhael AM, Moayyedi P, et al; Pregnancy outcomes in women taking probiotics or prebiotics: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2018 Jan 818(1):14. doi: 10.1186/s12884-017-1629-5.Markowiak-Kopec P, Slizewska K; The Effect of Probiotics on the Production of Short-Chain Fatty Acids by Human Intestinal Microbiome. Nutrients. 2020 Apr 1612(4):1107. doi: 10.3390/nu12041107.Wilkins T, Sequoia J; Probiotics for Gastrointestinal Conditions: A Summary of the Evidence. Am Fam Physician. 2017 Aug 196(3):170-178.Related InformationDiarrhoeaAcute Diarrhoea in ChildrenGastroenteritisGastroenteritis in ChildrenClostridium Difficile (C. Diff)  Probiotics for IBS: do they work?    8 minutes reading time  14-Feb-24  Hypnotherapy for IBS: the gut-brain axis     6 minutes reading time  26-Jan-24  Fish stew    30min cooking time      Coconut brownies    30min cooking time      Hi everyone! I'm 33yrs, female and was diagnosed with severe deficiency in the beginning of March (level <12ng). Symptoms came up in the summer of '19. Started with burning feet sometimes at night...   GuestJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy Peer reviewed by  Dr Krishna Vakharia Document ID  30493 (v2)  Last updated on   24 May 2023 Next review date  22 May 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  AntispasmodicsHealth informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Probiotics and Prebiotics: What's the Difference?     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/digestive-health/irritable-bowel-syndrome-leaflet/probiotics-and-prebioticsCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


