# Quitting Smoking (Smoking Cessation) | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Healthy Living  Smoking Quitting Smoking Last updated by Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP    Peer reviewed by Dr Toni Hazell, MRCGP  Last updated 21 Feb 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Benefits of Stopping Smoking      How to Quit Smoking      Passive Smoking      Are e-cigarettes safe?      Nicotine Replacement Therapy (NRT)      Bupropion for quitting smoking (Zyban) In this series     Benefits of Stopping Smoking      How to Quit Smoking      Passive Smoking      Are e-cigarettes safe?      Nicotine Replacement Therapy (NRT)      Bupropion for quitting smoking (Zyban) Cigarette smoking is the greatest single cause of illness and premature death in the UK. Worldwide, tobacco kills 7 million people every year. Almost a million deaths are due to non-smokers being exposed to second-hand smoke.In this article   Smoking facts and figures   Why smoking is bad for you   What are the effects of smoking?   Smoking in pregnancy   How does smoking affect other people?   Other problems with smoking   What are the benefits of stopping smoking?   How to stop smoking In This Article     SmokingQuitting SmokingIn this article Smoking facts and figures  Why smoking is bad for you  What are the effects of smoking?  Smoking in pregnancy  How does smoking affect other people?  Other problems with smoking  What are the benefits of stopping smoking?  How to stop smoking This leaflet explains why smoking tobacco is so harmful. It also lists the benefits of stopping, and how to get help to stop.Smoking facts and figuresUp to half of all smokers die from smoking-related diseases. About 100,000 people in the UK die each year due to smoking. Smoking-related deaths are mainly due to cancers, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), heart disease (such as heart attacks) and stroke.If you are a long-term smoker, on average, your life expectancy is about 10 years less than a non-smoker. Put another way, in the UK about 8 in 10 non-smokers live past the age of 70 but only about half of long-term smokers live past 70. The younger you are when you start smoking, the more likely you are to smoke for longer and to die early from smoking.Book a stop smoking consultationWant to quit smoking? Book a smoking cessation appointment with your local pharmacist today. Book now Many smoking-related deaths are not quick deaths. For example, if you develop COPD you can expect several years of illness and distressing symptoms (such as breathlessness) before you die.Smoking increases the risk of developing a number of other diseases (listed below). Many of these may not be fatal but they can cause years of illness and unpleasant symptoms.The good newsStopping smoking can make a big difference to your health. It is never too late to stop smoking to greatly health benefit. For example, if you stop smoking in middle age, before having cancer or some other serious disease, you avoid most of the increased risk of death due to smoking.Many people have given up smoking. In 1972 just under half of adults in the UK were smokers. By 1990 this had fallen to just under a third. At present, about a sixth of UK adults are smokers.Help is available if you want to stop smoking but are finding it difficult. Our picks for Smoking (Quitting Smoking) Smoking effects on skin: from ageing to illnessSmoking is bad for you but it's effects on your skin's health may not be the first thing you thi...   5min  Smoking effects on skin: from ageing to illness   5min  How to quit smoking during pregnancy    7min  Safer than cigarettes? The rise of vaping in schools    10min  Are e-cigarettes a safe way to quit smoking?   6minWhy smoking is bad for youNicotineNicotine is is inhaled from the tobacco in cigarettes. It gets into the bloodstream and stimulates the brain. Nicotine is addictive.If you are a regular smoker, when the blood level of nicotine falls, you usually develop withdrawal symptoms, such as:Craving.Anxiety.Restlessness.Headaches.Irritability.Hunger.Difficulty concentrating.Dizziness.Constipation.A craving for nicotine.Just feeling awful.These symptoms are relieved by the next cigarette. This is the definition of nicotine addiction.Most regular smokers are addicted to nicotine and smoke regularly to feel 'normal' and to prevent nicotine withdrawal symptoms.Withdrawal symptoms begin within a few hours after having the last cigarette. If they are not relieved by the next cigarette, withdrawal symptoms become worse. If you do not smoke any more, the withdrawal symptoms peak after about 24 hours and then gradually ease over about 2-4 weeks.About 2 in 3 of people who smoke want to stop smoking but, without help, many fail to succeed. The main reason why so few smokers succeed, even though they want to stop smoking, is because nicotine addiction is strong and difficult to break. However, many more succeed with support and the use of nicotine replacement therapy (NRT), electronic cigarettes or a smoking cessations medicine.Read about how to stop smoking.Tar which contains many chemicalsThese deposit in the lungs and can get into the blood vessels and be carried to other parts of the body. Cigarette smoke contains over 4,000 chemicals, including over 50 known causes of cancer (carcinogens) and other poisons.Carbon monoxideThis chemical affects the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood. In particular, in pregnant women who smoke, this causes a reduced amount of oxygen to get to the growing baby. This is thought to be the most important cause for the bad effects of smoking on the growing baby.What are the effects of smoking?Lung cancer. About 30,000 people in the UK die from lung cancer each year. More than 8 in 10 cases are directly related to smoking.COPD. About 25,000 people in the UK die each year from this serious lung disease. More than 8 in 10 of these deaths are directly linked to smoking. People who die of COPD are usually quite unwell for several years before they die.Heart disease. This is the biggest killer illness in the UK. About 120,000 people in the UK die each year from heart disease. About 1 in 6 of these is due to smoking. Recent UK research shows smoking even one cigarette a day is associated with major risks of heart disease or stroke - see Further Reading below.Stroke. You are up to six times more likely to have a stroke if you smoke and smoking doubles your risk of dying if you have a stroke.Other cancers - of the mouth, nose, throat, larynx, gullet (oesophagus), pancreas, bladder, neck of the womb (cervix), blood (leukaemia) and kidney are all more common in smokers.Circulation. The chemicals in cigarettes can damage the lining of the blood vessels and affect the level of fats (lipids) in the bloodstream. This increases the risk of atheroma forming (sometimes called hardening of the arteries). Atheroma is the main cause of heart disease, strokes, poor circulation in the legs (peripheral arterial disease) and swollen arteries which can burst causing internal bleeding (aneurysms). All these atheroma-related diseases are more common in smokers.Buerger's disease causes inflammation of blood vessels, particularly in the hands and feet. It occurs mainly in smokers. It leads to narrowing and blockage of the blood vessels, causing pain. It may eventually lead to damage and death of the tissues in the hands and/or feet.Sexual problems. Men who smoke are more likely than non-smokers to have erection problems (impotence) or have difficulty in maintaining an erection in middle life. This is thought to be due to smoking-related damage of the blood vessels to the penis.Contraception. Women who smoke and are 35 or over cannot use contraceptives that contain oestrogen, because the risks of stroke are so much higher. Their choice of contraception is therefore reduced.Rheumatoid arthritis. Smoking is known to be a risk factor for developing rheumatoid arthritis. One research study estimated that smoking is responsible for about 1 in 5 cases of rheumatoid arthritis.Ageing. Smokers tend to develop more lines on their face at an earlier age than non-smokers. This often makes smokers look older than they really are.Fertility is reduced in smokers (both male and female).Menopause. On average, women who smoke have a menopause nearly two years earlier than non-smokers.Other conditions where smoking often causes worse symptoms. These include:Asthma.Colds.Flu (influenza).Chest infections.Tuberculosis infection of the lungs.Long-term inflammation of the nose (chronic rhinitis).Eye damage due to diabetes (diabetic retinopathy).An overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism).A disorder of the brain and spinal cord (multiple sclerosis).Inflammation of the optic nerve (optic neuritis).A condition causing inflammation of the gut (Crohn's disease).Smoking increases your risk of developing various other conditions. These include:Dementia.Optic neuropathy - this is a condition affecting the nerve supplying the eye.Cataracts.A breakdown of the tissue at the back of the eye (macular degeneration).Pulmonary fibrosis.A skin condition called psoriasis.Gum disease.Tooth loss.'Thinning' of the bones (osteoporosis).Raynaud's phenomenon - in this condition, fingers turn white or blue when exposed to cold.Smoking in pregnancySmoking in pregnancy increases the risk of:Miscarriage.Complications of pregnancy, including bleeding during pregnancy, detachment of the 'afterbirth' (placenta), premature birth, and ectopic pregnancy.Low birth weight. Babies born to women who smoke are on average 200 grams (8 oz) lighter than babies born to comparable non-smoking mothers. Premature and low-birth-weight babies are more prone to illness and infections.Congenital defects in the baby - such as cleft palate.Stillbirth or death within the first week of life - the risk is increased by about one third.Poorer growth, development and health of the child. On average, compared with children born to non-smokers, children born to smokers are smaller, have lower achievements in reading and maths and an increased risk of developing asthma.See the separate leaflet called Pregnancy and Smoking for more details.How does smoking affect other people?Children, non-smoking adults and unborn babies can all be affected by your smoke.Children who live in a household with a smoker are more likely to have various health problems than children who don't. You don't even have to be smoking in the room or vehicle while a child is present, for them to be harmed by your smoke.Learn more about smoking and others in the separate leaflet called Passive Smoking.Other problems with smokingYour breath, clothes, hair, skin and home smell of stale tobacco. You do not notice the smell if you smoke; however, to non-smokers the smell is obvious and unpleasant.Your senses of smell and taste are dulled. Enjoyment of food may be reduced.Smoking is expensive.Life insurance is more expensive.Finding a job may be more difficult as employers know that smokers are more likely than non-smokers to have sick leave. More than 34 million working days (1% of total) are lost each year because of smoking-related sick leave.Potential friendships and romances may be at risk.What are the benefits of stopping smoking?There are huge benefits to stopping smoking and they start as soon as you stop:Your life expectancy goes up.Your health improves, even if you are already have a smoking-related condition.You will start to look younger.You won't smell of stale tobacco.You will save money.You will have done something to make you feel proud.See the separate leaflet called Benefits of Stopping Smoking.How to stop smokingThe most important thing to do is to decide for yourself that this is something you want to do. The majority of smokers want to stop. Some do so easily but for others it's a real struggle, as smoking is very addictive.There are lots of different things out there available to help you to stop:Nicotine replacement therapy (NRT).E-cigarettes.Varenicline (Champix®): this is no longer available in the UK or Europe. It may be unavailable long-term. As a precaution, this medication has been recalled and withdrawn because of an impurity found within it. See Further Reading below.Bupropion (Zyban®).Support and advice are available from GPs, practice nurses or pharmacists - all you need to do is ask.See the separate leaflet called How to Quit Smoking. Next article  Benefits of Stopping Smoking  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Tobacco: preventing uptake, promoting quitting and treating dependence; NICE guideline (2021 - last updated January 2023)Hackshaw A, Morris JK, Boniface S, et al; Low cigarette consumption and risk of coronary heart disease and stroke: meta-analysis of 141 cohort studies in 55 study reports. BMJ. 2018 Jan 24360:j5855.Smoking statistics; Action on Smoking and Health (ASH), May 2021Smoking cessation; NICE CKS, December 2022 (UK access only)Hajek P, Phillips-Waller A, Przulj D, et al; A Randomized Trial of E-Cigarettes versus Nicotine-Replacement Therapy. N Engl J Med. 2019 Feb 14380(7):629-637. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1808779. Epub 2019 Jan 30.Hartmann-Boyce J, McRobbie H, Butler AR, et al; Electronic cigarettes for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021 Sep 149:CD010216. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010216.pub6.Related InformationAre e-cigarettes a safe way to quit smoking?Nicotine Replacement Therapy (NRT)How to Quit SmokingAre e-cigarettes safe?Diet and Lifestyle during Pregnancy  Smoking effects on skin: from ageing to illness    5 minutes reading time  13-Feb-24  How to quit smoking during pregnancy     7 minutes reading time  05-Oct-23  Will making e-cigarettes available on prescription encourage teenagers to smoke?    6 minutes reading time  26-Nov-21  Should you take Champix to help you stop smoking?    5 minutes reading time  01-Jan-21  Hello, sorry for my bad english but i hope that u can understand, thanks 😃 So my questions is If u can hold ur breath for like 90-120 second, does it mean that ur lung are healthy ? If I can run up 1...   stefan69188Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Toni Hazell, MRCGP Document ID  4332 (v46)  Last updated on   21 February 2023 Next review date  20 February 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Next article Benefits of Stopping Smoking Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Quitting Smoking (Smoking Cessation)     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/healthy-living/quit-smoking-cessationCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


