# Roundworms: Symptoms and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Digestive Health  Roundworms Last updated by Dr Toni Hazell   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 10 Feb 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsRoundworms (also called nematodes) are worms with a long round body. They vary in length from several millimetres to up to two metres. Roundworms are common in warm tropical countries and most infections seen in the UK will have been acquired abroad. Children are more often affected than adults. Treatment is usually very effective but wiping out (eradication of) roundworm infections has proved to be very difficult.In this article   Can humans get roundworms?   Examples of roundworms   Where do roundworms come from?   Roundworm symptoms   Roundworm treatment   Can roundworms be prevented? In This Article     RoundwormsIn this article Can humans get roundworms?  Examples of roundworms  Where do roundworms come from?  Roundworm symptoms  Roundworm treatment  Can roundworms be prevented? Can humans get roundworms?Roundworm ascaris lumbricoidesCDC, Public Domain, via Wikimedia CommonsAbout 60 types (species) of roundworm can live in (are parasites of) humans. They usually live in the human gut. However, some species can travel from the gut to live in different parts of the body.Roundworm eggs and tiny young worms (larvae) live in the soil. They most commonly get into the body when a person gets them on his or her hands and then transfers them to the mouth. Some can also get into the body through the skin.Examples of roundwormsAscaris lumbricoides (also called human roundworm), which is the most common roundworm infection, and affects as many as one billion people worldwide.Hookworm infections.Guinea worm disease (dracunculiasis).Filariasis, which is caused by thread-like filarial nematodes (roundworms) in the family Filarioidea (also known as filariae). There are eight known filarial nematodes which use humans as the host. These are divided into three groups:Lymphatic filariasis - caused by the worms Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, and Brugia timori.Cutaneous filariasis - caused by Loa loa (the African eye worm), Mansonella streptocerca and Onchocerca volvulus.Body cavity filariasis - caused by the worms Mansonella perstans and Mansonella ozzardi.Threadworm (pinworm) - see the separate leaflet called Threadworms for more detail.Trichuriasis (whipworm).Trichinellosis.Angiostrongyliasis.Strongyloidiasis.Toxocariasis.Gnathostomiasis.Anisakiasis.Cutaneous larva migrans is a skin infection that causes a rash. It can be caused by the larvae of various nematodes that get into the skin.The number of roundworm infections throughout the world is generally increasing but varies according to levels of poverty, natural disasters and human conflicts. The spread of infection is also increasing in line with increased travel and mobility. In areas where roundworms are common, children can be continuously infected. As some worms die and are passed out in the stools (faeces), others may be growing to take their place.Want to see a dietician?Book a private assessment with a qualified dietician today. Book now Where do roundworms come from?The life cycle of roundworms varies between types (species).Soil and water supplies may become contaminated with roundworm eggs in areas of poor sanitation. Many roundworms have a complicated life cycle that includes both main hosts (large mammals such as humans or pigs) and intermediate hosts (small animals such as snails). Therefore, some roundworm infections occur as a result of eating uncooked contaminated food.The eggs may survive for years in moist soil. In the soil the eggs develop into tiny young worms (larvae). Larvae can get into the human gut if you eat them with contaminated food. They pass into the bloodstream and are carried to other parts of the body - such as the lungs.Larvae develop further and then often travel back to the gut, where the larvae then grow into adult worms. If you have worms in your gut, the female worm lays many tiny eggs. You pass these out with the stools (faeces).Roundworm symptomsThe symptoms depend on the types (species) of roundworm causing the infection. Many affected people have no symptoms. Heavy roundworm infection in children can cause nutritional problems resulting in poor growth and poor general well-being.Some affected people may develop one or more of the following:High temperature (fever).Tiredness.Allergic rash (urticaria).Abdominal (tummy) pains.Feeling sick (nausea), being sick (vomiting) and/or diarrhoea.Nerve problems.Cough, wheeze, fever and coughing up blood (haemoptysis) - this combination of symptoms due to roundworm larvae is called Löffler's syndrome and gets better by itself within two weeks.The larvae in the lungs can sometimes cause symptoms such as wheeze, cough and other chest problems.Other symptoms are specific to the different species of roundworm. For example, onchocerciasis can cause eye lesions, which may cause total loss of vision.Occasionally, roundworms cause a severe illness. For example, large numbers of worms can cause a blockage in the gut. In some people, roundworms cause serious infections to the liver or pancreas, or serious allergy symptoms.Roundworm treatmentControl of roundworm infections is based on treatment with medication, improved sanitation and health education. Treatments usually work well but wiping out (eradication of) roundworm infections from tropical countries presents a major challenge. However, some eradication programmes (notably for guinea worm disease) have been effective in reducing the burden of infection.How to get rid of roundwormsMebendazole is the usual medicine used for children aged over 1 year, and for adults who are not pregnant or breastfeeding. It comes as a tablet or drink. You take a dose twice a day for three days. (Note: mebendazole is recommended in UK guidelines for treatment from the age of 1 year. However, strictly speaking, it is not licensed for use in children younger than 2 years of age and so specialist advice should be sought for children in this age group.)Other medicines such as albendazole, levamisole, and ivermectin are used in countries where roundworms are common. They are not often used in the UK unless under the advice of a specialist.Diethylcarbamazine or ivermectin is used for people with infection with filariasis.For pregnant or breastfeeding women and newborn babies - your doctor will advise.Abdominal (tummy) pain, nausea or loose stools (diarrhoea) may briefly get worse with treatment but will then improve.Can roundworms be prevented?HygieneIn countries where roundworms are common, roundworms may be prevented by eating only cooked food and by avoiding green vegetables and salads. It is best if children do not play in areas of poor sanitation, or where human stool (faeces) is used as fertiliser. Always wash hands before eating or preparing food, and after going to the toilet or changing nappies.MedicationIf there is a high risk of infection, taking preventative medicine may be advised. For example, if you stay in an area known to be contaminated, or if you travel abroad to at-risk areas.Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Parasites A-Z; Centers for Disease Control and PreventionAbout Parasites; Centers for Disease Control and PreventionBethony J, Brooker S, Albonico M, et al; Soil-transmitted helminth infections: ascariasis, trichuriasis, and hookworm. Lancet. 2006 May 6367(9521):1521-32.Roundworm; NICE CKS, March 2018 (UK access only)Related InformationWorm Medicines (Anthelmintics)Mebendazole (Vermox, Ovex)ThreadwormsHealth Advice for Travel AbroadRoundworms (Nematodes) Pro  Hi All,  I dont know if anyone has come across this.  I have a worm infestation in my face.  They travel around under the skin leaving tracks and bursting holes into my skin.  they create glass like...   nicolamcJoin the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Toni Hazell Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  4385 (v43)  Last updated on   10 February 2023 Next review date  09 February 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Roundworms: Symptoms and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/digestive-health/roundworms-leafletCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


