# Sigmoidoscopy: Purpose and Procedure | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Cancer    Bowel Cancer (Colon and Rectal)  Sigmoidoscopy Last updated by Dr Claudia Berty   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 30 Mar 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Bowel Cancer (Colon and Rectal)      Bowel Cancer Screening      Faecal Immunochemical Test (Faecal Occult Blood Test)      Colonoscopy      Bowel Polyps (Colonic Polyps)      CT Colonography In this series     Bowel Cancer (Colon and Rectal)      Bowel Cancer Screening      Faecal Immunochemical Test (Faecal Occult Blood Test)      Colonoscopy      Bowel Polyps (Colonic Polyps)      CT Colonography A sigmoidoscopy is a test that looks at the rectum and lower part of the large intestine.Note: the information below is a general guide only. The arrangements and the way tests are performed, may vary between different hospitals. Always follow the instructions given by your doctor or local hospital.In this article   What is a sigmoidoscopy?   What is a sigmoidoscopy used for?   Preparing for a sigmoidoscopy   The sigmoidoscopy test   Sigmoidoscopy after-effects   Screening for bowel (colorectal) cancer with flexible sigmoidoscopy In This Article     SigmoidoscopyIn this article What is a sigmoidoscopy?  What is a sigmoidoscopy used for?  Preparing for a sigmoidoscopy  The sigmoidoscopy test  Sigmoidoscopy after-effects  Screening for bowel (colorectal) cancer with flexible sigmoidoscopy What is a sigmoidoscopy?Sigmoidoscopy investigationSigmoidoscopy is a procedure where a doctor or nurse looks into the rectum and sigmoid colon, using an instrument called a sigmoidoscope.The sigmoid colon is the final portion of the bowel that is joined to the rectum. A sigmoidoscope is a small tube with an attached light source about the thickness of your finger. An operator - a doctor or nurse - inserts the sigmoidoscope into the back passage (anus) and pushes it slowly into the rectum and sigmoid colon. This allows the doctor or nurse to see the lining of the rectum and sigmoid colon. The procedure is not usually painful but it may be a little uncomfortable.There are two types of sigmoidoscope that can be used.Flexible sigmoidoscopyThe most commonly used is the flexible sigmoidoscope. This thin, flexible tube allows your doctor to see around bends in the colon (large intestine). A flexible sigmoidoscope gives doctors a better view of the lower colon and usually makes the examination more comfortable.Rigid sigmoidoscopyThe rigid sigmoidoscope has generally been replaced by the flexible version and is now used less often. It allows your doctor to look into the rectum and the bottom part of the colon but it does not reach as far into the colon as the flexible sigmoidoscope. Our picks for Sigmoidoscopy 6 ways to reduce your risk of bowel cancerBowel cancer is the second most common cause of cancer death in the UK, accounting for 10% of al...   6min  6 ways to reduce your risk of bowel cancer   6min  What is the treatment for bowel cancer?   8min  What are the early warning signs of bowel cancer?   4min  What causes bowel cancer?   7minWhat is a sigmoidoscopy used for?Sigmoidoscopy can be used to investigate the cause of bleeding or pain from the back passage (rectum). Your doctor may also suggest this test if you have various other bowel-related symptoms. The test can also look for evidence of inflammation or cancer of the rectum and lower colon. Sigmoidoscopy can also be used to remove small fleshy lumps (polyps) that can be found in the colon and take samples of tissue (biopsy) for analysis. This is done by passing a thin 'grabbing' instrument down a side channel of the sigmoidoscope.Preparing for a sigmoidoscopyFor a doctor or nurse to obtain a clear view, your rectum and lower colon need to be empty of stools (faeces). You should be given detailed instructions on how to clear your bowel before you have a sigmoidoscopy. This is usually by taking powerful laxatives for a day or two, or by using one or two enemas prior to the procedure. A commonly used laxative to clear the bowel is called Picolax®.A common plan is:On the day before the procedure - take one Picolax® sachet (by mouth) at 8 am and one at 6 pm. Read the instructions carefully on the Picolax® sachet on how much water to add.For 12 hours before the procedure - have fluids only (liquiddiet) but you can eat a normal light breakfast on the morning just before the procedure.Sometimes you will be given an enema on arrival in the hospital to clear the very bottom of the colon of faeces.You should also let a doctor or nurse know if you have any other medical conditions.The sigmoidoscopy testThis test usually takes around 15 to 20 minutes. Usually you do not need an anaesthetic or sedation. You wear a hospital gown so that the lower half of your body is exposed. You will be asked to lie on your left side with your knees drawn up towards your chest.First the doctor or nurse will gently insert a gloved and lubricated finger (or fingers) into the rectum to check for blockage and to widen the back passage (anus). Then the sigmoidoscope will be inserted and gently pushed further into the rectum and colon.Air is gently pumped through the sigmoidoscope to help viewing. This can cause you to feel bloated and uncomfortable and give you an urge to move your bowels (defecate). As the sigmoidoscope is slowly removed, the lining of the bowel is carefully examined.A small sample (biopsy) of bowel lining may be taken during the procedure if the doctor finds a polyp in your colon. The sample is sent to the laboratory to be looked at under the microscope. It may also be tested for various conditions that can affect the bowel.Sigmoidoscopy after-effectsMost sigmoidoscopies are done without any problem. Some people do experience side-effects including:Crampy pains.Bloating.Excess wind.You can eat and drink as normal straight after the procedure.You may also have leakage of liquid accompanied by gas for up to 24 hours after taking the last dose of laxatives. You should arrange your work/social activities following a sigmoidoscopy with this in mind.Occasionally, the sigmoidoscope causes some damage to the rectum or colon. This may cause a small amount of bleeding, infection and (rarely) a hole (perforation) in the colon. If any of the following occur within 48 hours after a sigmoidoscopy, consult a doctor immediately:Severe tummy (abdominal) pain.Bloody bowel movements, rectal bleeding or blood clots.Raised temperature (fever).Screening for bowel (colorectal) cancer with flexible sigmoidoscopyIt has been proposed that a routine flexible sigmoidoscopy test should be offered to all older adults to screen for bowel cancer. This is because most bowel small fleshy lumps (polyps) and colorectal cancers develop in the rectum, sigmoid colon or lower descending colon.Bowel (colonic) polyps are small non-cancerous (benign) growths on the inside lining of the colon or rectum. They are common in older people. They usually cause no symptoms or problems. However, if a polyp is found, it is usually removed. This is because there is a small risk of a colonic polyp developing into a bowel cancer after several years.See the separate leaflet called Faecal Immunochemical Test (Faecal Occult Blood Test) for further information on screening for bowel cancer.Previous article   Faecal Immunochemical Test (Faecal Occult Blood Test) Next article  Colonoscopy  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Related InformationBowel Cancer (Colon and Rectal)Bowel Cancer ScreeningColonoscopyCT ColonographyBarium Enema  6 ways to reduce your risk of bowel cancer    6 minutes reading time  11-Sep-23  What is the treatment for bowel cancer?    8 minutes reading time  25-May-23  Poo - what's normal?    5 minutes reading time  26-Sep-22  Why bowel cancer screening is so important    6 minutes reading time  18-Jan-18  Hello everyone, I'm a 31-year-old male reaching out for some insights regarding my current health worries to do with bowel cancer. For the past 2-3 years, possibly longer, I've been experiencing...   ChrisdavrJoin the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Claudia Berty Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  4689 (v43)  Last updated on   30 March 2023 Next review date  16 February 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Faecal Immunochemical Test (Faecal Occult Blood Test)Next article Colonoscopy Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Sigmoidoscopy: Purpose and Procedure     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/cancer/colon-rectal-bowel-cancer-colorectal/sigmoidoscopyCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


