# Sleeping Tablets: Risks, Types, and Alternatives | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Mental Health    Insomnia (Poor Sleep)  Sleeping Tablets Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP   Last updated 18 Nov 2022   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Insomnia (Poor Sleep)      Snoring      Sleepwalking      Sleep Paralysis      Benzodiazepines and Z Drugs In this series     Insomnia (Poor Sleep)      Snoring      Sleepwalking      Sleep Paralysis      Benzodiazepines and Z Drugs Doctors avoid prescribing sleeping tablets if possible due to the problems they can cause and the concern that you could become dependent on them.In this article   Are sleeping tablets bad for you?   How do sleeping tablets work?   Are there different types of sleeping tablet?   What is the alternative to sleeping tablets?   Do I need a prescription for sleeping tablets?   Can you take sleeping tablets every night? In This Article     Sleeping TabletsIn this article Are sleeping tablets bad for you?  How do sleeping tablets work?  Are there different types of sleeping tablet?  What is the alternative to sleeping tablets?  Do I need a prescription for sleeping tablets?  Can you take sleeping tablets every night? Are sleeping tablets bad for you?In particular, the concern is that you could become dependent on sleeping aids or addicted to them. Possible problems when taking sleeping tablets include the following:Drowsiness the next dayYou may not be safe to drive a vehicle or to operate machinery due to the sedating effect. Evidence shows people who take sleeping tablets are more likely to be involved in road traffic accidents.Clumsiness, drowsiness, and confusion in the night (if you get up)These can occur - for example, if you have to get up in the middle of the night to go to the toilet. You may fall over and injure yourself if you feel sleepy. Some people have fallen down stairs due to the drowsiness caused by sleeping tablets. (Older people who take sleeping tablets have an increased risk of breaking their hip, as the result of a fall.)RisksOne study suggests that people who use sleeping tablets for a long time are more likely to develop dementia. (This has not been proven yet.)ToleranceIf you take sleeping medicine such as benzodiazepines and Z drug sleeping tablets to treat insomnia each night, your body becomes used to them. This means that, in time, the usual dose has no effect. You then need a higher dose for it to work. In time, the higher dose does not work and you need an even higher dose, and so on. It can take as little time as just a few days for tolerance to develop.DependenceSome people become dependent on benzodiazepines or Z drugs. This means that withdrawal symptoms occur if the tablets are stopped suddenly. Withdrawal symptoms include mental health problems such as anxiety, shaking, or just feeling awful. If you have taken a benzodiazepine or Z drug regularly for more than two to four weeks, you will need to come off it gradually, to avoid withdrawal symptoms.AddictionSome people who are dependent on benzodiazepines or Z drugs may become addicted to them. If you are addicted to a medication, you have uncontrollable cravings for it and feel a need to take it. This can happen even after you have slowly withdrawn from it so that you are no longer dependent. Tolerance, dependence and addiction are different things. Some types of people seem more likely than others to become addicted to substances.In some cases, however, sleeping tablets may be very helpful. In short courses for time-limited problems, they are safe to use. For example, if you have had a sudden shock or bereavement, sleeping can be a problem. A short course of sleeping tablets (for a week or two) may help you cope better in the daytime. Or if you have jet lag and are struggling with re-setting your internal time clock. Doctors advise that you take no more than two weeks of sleeping tablets at a time. If you just take the tablets for a week or two, you will not become dependent on them.How do sleeping tablets work?Sleeping tablets work either by a general affect on the brain to promote drowsiness or by directly binding with receptors in the brain to cause sleepiness or relaxation. There are different types of sleeping pills that work in different ways, but all generally affect the brain in some way to promote sleep. It is also thought that there is an additional placebo affect, which means that just by taking the tablets, you may feel more relaxed and positive about getting to sleep, and therefore more likely to get a better night's sleep.Are there different types of sleeping tablet?Benzodiazepines and Z drugsBenzodiazepines and Z drugs are sometimes used as sleeping tablets. Benzodiazepines include temazepam, loprazolam, lormetazepam, and nitrazepam. They are only available on prescription. Other related drugs called zaleplon (no longer available in the UK), zolpidem and zopiclone are also sleeping tablets. Strictly speaking, they are not benzodiazepines. They are known as the Z drugs. However, they act in a similar way (they have a similar effect to benzodiazepines on the brain cells).AntihistaminesThese medicines are commonly used to treat allergic reactions such as hay fever. However, drowsiness is a side-effect of some antihistamines - for example, promethazine. This 'side-effect' is useful in some people who have difficulty sleeping because of their allergy. An antihistamine is the active ingredient of some sleeping tablets that you can buy from pharmacies, without a prescription. Antihistamines are not as powerful as benzodiazepines or Z drugs at causing sleep. Also, they may cause a 'hangover' effect and some drowsiness in the morning. They may also cause rebound insomnia if you take them for a long time. For these reasons, current UK guidelines do not advise the use of antihistamines to be used solely as a sleeping tablet.MelatoninMelatonin is, strictly speaking, not a 'sleeping tablet'. Melatonin is a naturally occurring hormone made by the body. The level of melatonin in the body varies throughout the day. It is involved in helping to regulate the daily cycles (circadian rhythms) of various functions in the body. A melatonin supplement is sometimes advised in older people (more than 55 years of age) with sleep disorders such as long-term insomnia. The recommended duration of treatment is for three weeks to start with. If helpful, it can be used for a maximum of ten weeks in total.In some countries melatonin is used to help with sleep problems related to jet lag. In the UK it is not currently licensed for this.Other medicinesChlormethiazole, chloral, and barbiturates are old-fashioned sleeping tablets. They are not commonly used these days, as benzodiazepines and Z drugs are usually preferred. Certain antidepressants are sometimes used to help with sleep, particularly if depression or anxiety is thought to be causing the problem. Our picks for Sleeping Tablets How to sleep betterInsomnia is very common - with at least 1 in 3 people having problems sleeping. But simple chang...   4min  How to sleep better   4min  How to sleep better during a heatwave   3min  Is maladaptive daydreaming a sign of mental illness?    8min  How revenge bedtime procrastination affects your health - and how to avoid it   3minLooking for a counsellor?Video appointments with qualified counsellors are now available in Patient Access Book now What is the alternative to sleeping tablets?Try to work out the reason for your sleeping difficulties and identify any specific factors that counter sleep. Where possible, correct any or all of these factors.Your doctor or nurse may give you advice on how to tackle poor sleep naturally. They may also refer you for a type of talking therapy called cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). CBT is a type of brain-training, which aims to teach your brain how to fall and stay asleep.See also the separate leaflet called Insomnia (Poor Sleep).Do I need a prescription for sleeping tablets?If your doctor or pharmacist prescribes a benzodiazepine or Z drug as a sleeping tablet for you, it will usually be only short-term (a week or so). This is to help you get over a particularly bad patch and get a good night's sleep. Sometimes a doctor will advise sleeping tablets to be taken on only two or three nights per week, rather than on every night. This prevents either tolerance to or dependence on the tablet from developing.Can you take sleeping tablets every night?For various reasons, some people have become used to taking a benzodiazepine or Z drug sleeping tablet every night. As a rule, if you are taking one of these sleeping tablets each night, you should consider reducing or stopping them. However, in some people, problems of tolerance or dependence (see above) mean that it can be difficult to stop the tablet suddenly.If you want to reduce or stop benzodiazepine or Z drug sleeping tablets, it is best to consult a doctor or nurse for advice. The sort of advice may include the following:Do it gradually and cut the dose down a little at a time. A switch to a different benzodiazepine (diazepam) may be advised. This is because it is easier to reduce the dose of diazepam gradually than it is with other benzodiazepines or Z drugs.It is best to wait until any life crisis has passed and your level of stress is as low as can be.Consider stopping the tablets whilst on holiday, when you have less pressure from work, family, etc.You are likely to have a period of worse sleep when you stop the tablets. Try to anticipate and accept this.Advice on coping strategies, and tips on how to improve your sleep pattern naturally.See the separate leaflet called Stopping Benzodiazepines and Z Drugs. However, stopping benzodiazepine or Z drug sleeping tablets is not practical in every case.How many sleeping tablets are harmful?The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has published guidance on safe prescribing and stopping medicines that can lead to addiction or withdrawal symptoms in adults. They have concentrated on benzodiazepines and Z drugs which are often used for sleep issues, as well as some medication used for pain relief (opioids, gabapentin and pregabalin). They have also discussed antidepressants which are not addictive but can cause withdrawal symptoms.Before they prescribe, your doctor will take into account:If other methods or medications that are not addictive have been tried.Issues that could lead you to becoming addicted to the medicationThat you have all the information you need to make a decision.What you should know when starting a medication:The type of medication and why it has been prescribed for you.The starting dose and when doses will be changed if needed.The side effects and how long they may last.Who to contact if any queries or concerns.How long the medication will take to work and how long you will stay on it for.How long the prescription given is for - eg, one week, two weeksThe risks of addiction and overdose.When you will have a review.Your doctor may stop the medication if:There is no benefit or it is no longer helping you.There are symptoms or signs of addiction.Your illness is better.There are more harms than benefits to taking the medication.You, as a patient, want to stop the medication.The doctor will stop the medication slowly. They will discuss with you how to do this taking into account issues that may make stopping the medication difficult.A note on withdrawing from benzodiazepines: if you are on medications such as lorazepam or nitrazepam, you may be switched to diazepam. This medication has a longer half life, meaning it will stay in your body longer reducing any withdrawal effects. Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) alongside withdrawing from a benzodiazepine can also help manage symptoms. Your doctor may refer you for CBT whilst stopping this type of medication.For Further Reading, see below.How to use the Yellow Card SchemeIf you think you have had a side-effect to one of your medicines you can report this on the Yellow Card Scheme. You can do this online at www.mhra.gov.uk/yellowcard.The Yellow Card Scheme is used to make pharmacists, doctors and nurses aware of any new side-effects that medicines or any other healthcare products may have caused. If you wish to report a side-effect, you will need to provide basic information about:The side-effect.The name of the medicine which you think caused it.The person who had the side-effect.Your contact details as the reporter of the side-effect.It is helpful if you have your medication - and/or the leaflet that came with it - with you while you fill out the report.Previous article   Sleep Paralysis Next article  Benzodiazepines and Z Drugs  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms: safe prescribing and withdrawal management for adults; NICE guidance (April 2022)Consensus statement on evidence-based treatment of insomnia, parasomnias and circadian rhythm disorders; British Association for Psychopharmacology (2010)British National Formulary (BNF); NICE Evidence Services (UK access only)Insomnia - zaleplon, zolpidem and zopiclone for the management of insomnia; NICE Technology appraisal guidance, April 2004Insomnia; NICE CKS, May 2022 (UK access only)Sleep Diary; The Sleep Charity.Buysse DJ, Germain A, Moul DE, et al; Efficacy of brief behavioral treatment for chronic insomnia in older adults. Arch Intern Med. 2011 May 23171(10):887-95. Epub 2011 Jan 24.Taibi DM, Landis CA, Petry H, et al; A systematic review of valerian as a sleep aid: safe but not effective. Sleep Med Rev. 2007 Jun11(3):209-30.Buysse DJ; Insomnia. JAMA. 2013 Feb 20309(7):706-16. doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.193.Luik AI, Kyle SD, Espie CA; Digital Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (dCBT) for Insomnia: a State-of-the-Science Review. Curr Sleep Med Rep. 20173(2):48-56. doi: 10.1007/s40675-017-0065-4. Epub 2017 May 8.Lemoine P, Zisapel N; Prolonged-release formulation of melatonin (Circadin) for the treatment of insomnia. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2012 Apr13(6):895-905. doi: 10.1517/14656566.2012.667076. Epub 2012 Mar 19.Qaseem A, Kansagara D, Forciea MA, et al; Management of Chronic Insomnia Disorder in Adults: A Clinical Practice Guideline From the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2016 Jul 19165(2):125-33. doi: 10.7326/M15-2175. Epub 2016 May 3.Sateia MJ, Buysse DJ, Krystal AD, et al; Clinical Practice Guideline for the Pharmacologic Treatment of Chronic Insomnia in Adults: An American Academy of Sleep Medicine Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Sleep Med. 2017 Feb 1513(2):307-349. doi: 10.5664/jcsm.6470.Hale L, Guan S; Screen time and sleep among school-aged children and adolescents: a systematic literature review. Sleep Med Rev. 2015 Jun21:50-8. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2014.07.007. Epub 2014 Aug 12.Chang AM, Aeschbach D, Duffy JF, et al; Evening use of light-emitting eReaders negatively affects sleep, circadian timing, and next-morning alertness. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jan 27112(4):1232-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1418490112. Epub 2014 Dec 22.Related InformationInsomnia ProBenzodiazepine Dependence ProInsomnia (Poor Sleep)Lormetazepam tabletsTemazepam  How to sleep better    4 minutes reading time  13-Feb-24  How to sleep better during a heatwave    3 minutes reading time  15-Jun-23  Before bed biscuits    30min cooking time   What causes sleepwalking and how can you stop?    7 minutes reading time  25-Apr-22  I'm writing here because it'll be Agust 28th  before I can even see a doctor. Lately, when I try to go to sleep, just as I start to drift off, I get something that I can only describe as a surge of...   josh95969Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP Document ID  4630 (v44)  Last updated on   18 November 2022 Next review date  17 November 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Sleep ParalysisNext article Benzodiazepines and Z Drugs Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Sleeping Tablets: Risks, Types, and Alternatives     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/mental-health/insomnia-poor-sleep/sleeping-tabletsCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up

