# Sources of NHS Help When Unwell | Health | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Treatment and Medication    NHS and Other Care Options  Sources of NHS Help When Unwell Last updated by Dr Mary Harding   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy  Last updated 21 Jun 2016   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     NHS and Other Care Options      Help With Health Costs      Free or Reduced Cost Prescriptions      Accessible Leaflets In this series     NHS and Other Care Options      Help With Health Costs      Free or Reduced Cost Prescriptions      Accessible Leaflets This page has been archived. It has not been updated since 21/06/2016. External links and references may no longer work.When you are ill, it can be difficult to know where you should go or whom you should call. This leaflet sets out the options available through the NHS in the UK. It tries to make it clear where you should go in different situations. What you should do depends on how seriously ill you are and how urgently you need to be seen. In other countries, the system is likely to be different, and this information will not apply. However, this leaflet does explain what care you can get on the NHS if you are not a UK resident.See separate leaflet called NHS and Other Care Options for more information about healthcare options in the UK.In this article   Emergencies   Urgent medical problems   Routine medical care   Minor injuries   Advice about medication or self-care   Dental emergencies   NHS help for Non-UK Residents In This Article     Sources of NHS Help When UnwellIn this article Emergencies  Urgent medical problems  Routine medical care  Minor injuries  Advice about medication or self-care  Dental emergencies  NHS help for Non-UK Residents EmergenciesIn an emergency, call 999. This is an immediate ambulance response for serious or life-threatening injury or illness. Examples of conditions for which it would be appropriate to call an ambulance include:Suspected stroke.Severe chest pain and/or breathing difficulty.Choking.Being unconscious.Heavy bleeding which you cannot stop.Serious injuries following a road traffic accident.Severe allergic reactions.Severe burns.If you have a very severe or life-threatening injury or condition, you may also go to your nearest Accident and Emergency (A&E) department. Usually when you call an ambulance, if they consider your condition serious, they will take you to the nearest A&E. You may also choose to go there directly yourself if someone can take you and if it is safe to do so.Urgent medical problemsMake an appointment with your GP if you are unwell or need medical advice. GP surgeries offer "urgent" appointments for problems which need to be dealt with that day. This might include, for example:Having a high temperature (fever).Rashes.Chest infections.Urine infections.Being in pain.If your medical problem cannot wait until you can see/talk to your GP but it is not so urgent as to require a 999 call, call 111. You may also call 111 if you are not sure where is best to go for treatment. This is the NHS advice line but the number depends on where you live:In England: NHS-111 advice line, dial 111.In Scotland: NHS 24 advice line, also dial 111.In Wales: NHS Direct Wales advice line, dial 0845 46 47.In Northern Ireland: varies, see the out of hours service details.Alternatively, if your GP surgery is closed and your problem cannot wait, you could attend your nearest urgent care centre or walk-in centre. You can find your nearest centre on the UK NHS websites. Examples of problems which can be dealt with include:If you are concerned about a rash on yourself or your child.If you are concerned about a child with a temperature.If you or your child has severe earache.You think you have a urinary tract infection.You have a wound which you think might be infected.Minor injuries:Cuts.Burns.Bites.Minor head injuries.Sprains.Suspected broken bones (fractures).Want to speak to a pharmacist?Book a private telephone consultation with a local pharmacist today Book now Routine medical careFor general medical care and advice, make an appointment at your GP surgery. Depending on your problem, you may be seen by a doctor, a nurse, or another healthcare professional. GPs deal with a huge range of health-related problems and are generally the first port of call when you are unwell.Minor injuriesFor minor cuts, sprains, mild scalds, or other less serious injuries, go to a minor injuries unit. Minor injury units will usually be able to arrange an X-ray if necessary to rule out a broken bone (fracture). They will be able to stitch, bandage, arrange crutches, etc, as necessary. For more serious injuries, you should attend an A&E department.Advice about medication or self-careFor advice about your medication, or for advice about self-help remedies for minor ailments, go to your local pharmacy. Pharmacists are experts in medicines. If you have a question about your medication, how to take it, or side-effects, a pharmacist will be able to help. They can advise on self-help remedies and on medication which does not need a prescription. For many minor illnesses, such as sore throats, mouth ulcers, or coughs and colds, you may be able to manage this yourself without medical advice. A pharmacist may help with some advice about over-the-counter medication which may relieve your symptoms.Dental emergenciesIf you have an urgent dental problem and are registered with a dentist, you should contact your usual dentist for advice. If you are not registered with a dentist, or your dental surgery is closed, you should try one of the following:Call 111 (in England and Scotland. See 'urgent medical problems' above for details of the number in Wales and Northern Ireland).Call your dentist and listen to the message on the answering machine. It should have the number to contact in an emergency for out-of-hours dental care.Go to A&E if you have a serious dental problem such as:Pain which will not settle despite painkillers.Heavy bleeding from your mouth.Trauma to your teeth, mouth or jaw from an injury.NHS help for Non-UK ResidentsIf you are visiting the UK, you may have to pay for any medical treatment you need. Your travel or medical insurance may cover this.Those who will NOT be charged for NHS treatment include:Visitors from the European Economic Area (EEA) or Switzerland. You will need a European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) from your home country (unless you are from Switzerland). If you do not have an EHIC you may be charged for treatment. (The EEA includes all countries from the European Union (EU), Iceland, Norway and Lichtenstein. For many medical problems, there is a reciprocal arrangement with these countries, and with Switzerland. Visitors can access care in each other's country. This does not include planned treatment.)People who need to be seen in the A&E department.People who need an ambulance for an emergency.People who need family planning services.People who need hospital treatment for most infectious diseases, including sexually transmitted infections (STIs).People who need hospital treatment for a physical or mental condition caused by torture, female genital mutilation (FGM), domestic violence or sexual violence.People granted refugee status in the UK, or seeking asylum.People needing compulsory psychiatric treatment.People who are working or living abroad because they are members of the armed forces, on government work, etc.For full details for visitors accessing healthcare, please look on the individual websites for NHS England, NHS Scotland, NHS Wales and the NHS in Northern Ireland.See separate leaflet called NHS and Other Care Options for more information about healthcare options in the UK.Previous article   NHS and Other Care Options Next article  Help With Health Costs  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Related InformationNHS and Other Care OptionsPrimary Healthcare Team ProPrimary Care Clinics ProPrescribing Analysis and Audit ProPersonal Development Plans Pro  Practical ways to manage your medicines at home    10 minutes reading time  04-Dec-23 Sponsored  How can we self-monitor our health?    5 minutes reading time  03-Oct-22  Should you 'come out' to your doctor?    7 minutes reading time  12-Aug-19  Calculating absolute risk and relative risk    6 minutes reading time  31-Jan-18  So I have no idea what to do at this point. I have had four echocardiograms and many ekgs and holter monitors and am expecting one in the next two weeks. I randomly get this weird feeling which feels...   mark415Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Mary Harding Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy Document ID  29270 (v1)  Last updated on   21 June 2016 Status  Archived The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  NHS and Other Care OptionsNext article Help With Health Costs Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Sources of NHS Help When Unwell      close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/treatment-medication/nhs-and-other-care-options/sources-of-nhs-help-when-unwellCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


