# Spinal Stenosis: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Bones, Joints and Muscles    Back and Spine Pain  Spinal Stenosis Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy   Authored by Dr Colin Tidy   Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy  Last updated 21 Sep 2022   Originally published 22 Feb 2017   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Back and Spine Pain      Lower Back Pain      Slipped Disc      Cauda Equina Syndrome      Thoracic Back Pain      Back Pain in Children In this series     Back and Spine Pain      Lower Back Pain      Slipped Disc      Cauda Equina Syndrome      Thoracic Back Pain      Back Pain in Children Spinal stenosis is a term used to describe a narrowing of the spinal canal. The narrowing may not cause any symptoms. However, the narrowing may progress to cause squeezing (compression) of the spinal nerves or compression of the spine. Spinal stenosis causes back pain and leg pain. Most often it occurs when you walk. Weakness of the legs may make you feel unsteady. This may affect both legs or just one leg. Spinal stenosis affecting the cervical spine in your neck may also cause pain and weakness in the shoulders and arms.Spinal stenosis can often be treated by simple measures such as medicines for pain relief, keeping as active as you can and losing weight if you are overweight. Sometimes steroid injections or surgery are needed if simple measures are not successful.In this article   What is spinal stenosis?   Spinal stenosis causes   How common is spinal stenosis?   Spinal stenosis symptoms   What tests are used to diagnose spinal stenosis?   What is the treatment for spinal stenosis?   What is the outcome (prognosis)? In This Article     Spinal StenosisIn this article What is spinal stenosis?  Spinal stenosis causes  How common is spinal stenosis?  Spinal stenosis symptoms  What tests are used to diagnose spinal stenosis?  What is the treatment for spinal stenosis?  What is the outcome (prognosis)? What is spinal stenosis?Spinal stenosis is a term used to describe a narrowing of the spinal canal. The narrowing may not cause any symptoms. However, the narrowing may progress to cause squeezing (compression) of the spinal nerves or compression of the spine. Narrowing that affects the spinal cord is sometimes called a myelopathy. More than one level of the spine may be affected. The blood supply to the nerves in the spine may also be temporarily reduced by the compression.The lower end of the spinal cord is at the level of the first or second lumbar bone (vertebra). The nerves from the spinal cord then form a structure called the conus medullaris. The spinal nerves continue to branch out below the conus medullaris to form the cauda equina.Pressure on the cauda equina causes cauda equina syndrome. Cauda equina syndrome may cause low back pain and problems with bowel and bladder function, numbness in the saddle area, which is around the back passage (anus), and weakness in one or both legs. Cauda equina syndrome needs urgent investigation and treatment to prevent the nerves to the bladder and bowel from becoming permanently damaged.Understanding the backThe spine is made up of many bones called vertebrae. These are roughly circular and between each vertebra is a disc. The discs are made of strong rubber-like tissue which allows the spine to be fairly flexible. A disc has a stronger fibrous outer part and a softer jelly-like middle part called the nucleus pulposus.The spinal cord, which contains the nerves that come from the brain, is protected by the spine. Nerves from the spinal cord come out from between the vertebrae to relay messages to and from various parts of the body.Spinal cordClose-up diagram lumbar spinal cordSpinal stenosis causesUsually, as part of the normal ageing process, degenerative changes occur in the spine, especially in the lower back and neck. Sometimes this causes partial compression (stenosis) of the nerve tunnel within the spine. This is called central stenosis. Sometimes there is a constriction to the smaller side tunnels with the spine. This is called foraminal stenosis.Do you need a physiotherapist?Book a private appointment with a local physio today Book now How common is spinal stenosis?Spinal stenosis is common, especially in older people. However, it can also rarely affect younger people. Spinal stenosis most often affects the lower (lumbar) spine. The next most commonly affected part of the spine is the cervical spine in the neck. Stenosis of the spine at the back of your chest (thoracic spine) is much less common.Spinal stenosis symptomsSymptoms of spinal stenosis include back pain and leg pain. Most often it occurs when you walk. Weakness of the legs may make you feel unsteady. This may affect both legs or just one leg. Spinal stenosis affecting the cervical spine may also cause pain and weakness in the shoulders and arms.Claudication is the term used to describe weakness of the legs that becomes worse specifically on walking. Claudication is caused either by narrowing of the blood vessels supplying the leg or because of spinal stenosis.Usually spinal stenosis prevents you from walking beyond a certain distance. You then have to stop because of increasing pain and numbness in one or both of your legs. The symptoms can also occur when standing. Usually the symptoms reduce if you sit down or lean forwards. There is usually no pain when you are resting.Walking usually only aggravates the leg symptoms. The back pain caused by spinal stenosis does not increase with walking.What tests are used to diagnose spinal stenosis?If your doctor thinks that you may have spinal stenosis then an MRI scan may be needed to confirm the diagnosis.What is the treatment for spinal stenosis?How you can help to improve your own symptomsMaintain activity as much as you can. Try to gradually increase the distance you walk if you can.Try to lose weight if you are overweight.Pain relief. Using over-the-counter medication such as paracetamol or ibuprofen may be sufficient. Other medicines prescribed by your doctor can be used if over-the-counter medicines do not provide enough pain relief. Some medicines can be used specifically to help the nerve pain in your legs - for example, amitriptyline, gabapentin or pregabalin.Other available treatmentsSpinal injections: injections of a steroid with local anaesthetic given into the spinal root canal or given by epidural injections can be helpful.Surgery: if symptoms still do not improve then one option is surgery. The most commonly used operation is called a decompression. The bone that is compressing the nerves is removed so that the nerves have more room. The two bones (vertebrae) may also be fused together (this is called spinal fusion).There is very limited evidence for surgery to treat spinal stenosis. The success of surgery for spinal stenosis is variable. Although the symptoms may improve just after the operation, the medium-term and long-term results can be disappointing.Interspinous distraction: this procedure involves placing an implant between the spinous processes of the affected vertebrae (usually the fourth and fifth lumbar vertebrae) in order to limit you extending your back. This helps to prevent or reduce the pain in your legs when standing or walking.What is the outcome (prognosis)?The outcome is very variable and, without treatment, the symptoms usually gradually become worse. Although treatments for spinal stenosis are often effective at reducing symptoms, the symptoms don't usually completely resolve.Previous article   Slipped Disc Next article  Cauda Equina Syndrome  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Bagley C, MacAllister M, Dosselman L, et al; Current concepts and recent advances in understanding and managing lumbar spine stenosis. F1000Res. 2019 Jan 318. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.16082.1. eCollection 2019.Kato S, Fehlings M; Degenerative cervical myelopathy. Curr Rev Musculoskelet Med. 2016 Sep9(3):263-71. doi: 10.1007/s12178-016-9348-5.Zaina F, Tomkins-Lane C, Carragee E, et al; Surgical versus non-surgical treatment for lumbar spinal stenosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Jan 29(1):CD010264. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010264.pub2.Interspinous distraction procedures for lumbar spinal stenosis causing neurogenic claudication; NICE Interventional procedure guidance, November 2010Raja A, Hoang S, Patel P, et al; Spinal Stenosis. StatPearls, Jan 2022.Related InformationSpinal Stenosis ProMeralgia Paraesthetica ProNeuropathic Pain and its Management ProNeuropathic Pain (Neuralgia)Meralgia Paraesthetica  When to worry about back pain    5 minutes reading time  18-May-23  How to relieve sciatica pain     5 minutes reading time  10-Feb-23  How to manage chronic pain    7 minutes reading time  20-Nov-19       Video: Glute strengthening exercises  i am 4 wks post op today having a spinal cord stimulator fitted had trial 15months ago i am struggling so much wondering if anyone feels or felt the samethanks   deborah91242Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Authored by   Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy Peer reviewed by  Dr Hayley Willacy Document ID  29375 (v2)  Originally published on   22 February 2017  Last updated on   21 September 2022 Next review date  20 September 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Slipped DiscNext article Cauda Equina Syndrome Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Spinal Stenosis: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/bones-joints-muscles/back-and-spine-pain/spinal-stenosisCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


