# Stem Cell Transplant | Cancer Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Cancer    Blood Cancers  Stem Cell Transplant Last updated by Dr Laurence Knott   Peer reviewed by Dr Adrian Bonsall  Last updated 26 Mar 2018   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Blood Cancers      Hodgkin's Lymphoma      Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma      Myeloma      Bone Marrow Biopsy and Aspiration In this series     Blood Cancers      Hodgkin's Lymphoma      Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma      Myeloma      Bone Marrow Biopsy and Aspiration This page has been archived. It has not been updated since 26/03/2018. External links and references may no longer work.A stem cell transplant is used to increase the chance of a cure or remission for various cancers and blood disorders.In this article   What is a stem cell transplant?   What is the bone marrow, and what are stem cells and blood cells?   When is a stem cell transplant used for treatment?   Where are stem cells obtained from?   How is a stem cell transplant performed?   Stem cell transplant risks In This Article     Stem Cell TransplantIn this article What is a stem cell transplant?  What is the bone marrow, and what are stem cells and blood cells?  When is a stem cell transplant used for treatment?  Where are stem cells obtained from?  How is a stem cell transplant performed?  Stem cell transplant risks It usually involves intense chemotherapy followed by an infusion of stem cells. The treatment requires close nursing and medical care for a number of weeks. It can be a gruelling treatment and there are risks. Your specialist can advise when the likely benefits of this procedure outweigh the risks.There is now a great deal of research about using stem cell transplants for many other conditions - for example, damage to heart tissue (such as after a heart attack) or for damage to the nervous system (such as dementia or Parkinson's disease).What is a stem cell transplant?A stem cell transplant may be used so that you can have intensive high-dose chemotherapy (and sometimes radiotherapy) to kill cancerous cells. The chemotherapy is higher than conventional chemotherapy and also kills the stem cells in the bone marrow that would normally make blood cells. Therefore, following the chemotherapy, you are given back (transplanted) stem cells which can then make normal blood cells again.A stem cell transplant is sometimes called a bone marrow transplant. However, stem cells can be obtained from blood as well as from the bone marrow. So, the term stem cell transplant is now used.What is the bone marrow, and what are stem cells and blood cells?Bone marrowBlood cells are made in the bone marrow, by stem cells. Bone marrow is the soft sponge-like material in the centre of bones. Large flat bones such as the breastbone (sternum) and pelvis contain the most bone marrow. To make blood cells constantly you need a healthy bone marrow. You also need nutrients from your diet, including iron and some vitamins.Stem cellsStem cells are immature (primitive) cells. There are two main types in the bone marrow - myeloid and lymphoid stem cells. These derive from even more primitive cells called common pluripotent stem cells. Stem cells constantly divide and produce new cells. Some new cells remain as stem cells and others go through a series of maturing stages (precursor or blast cells) before forming into fully formed (mature) blood cells.Blood cellsMature blood cells are released from the bone marrow into the bloodstream. Mature blood cells are red cells (erythrocytes), white cells (leukocytes) and platelets. See the separate leaflet called Blood.Stem cells rapidly multiply to make millions of blood cells each day. Because of this they are more easily killed by chemotherapy than most other cells in the body. This is because chemotherapy medicines work by killing rapidly dividing cells (such as cancer cells).When is a stem cell transplant used for treatment?A stem cell transplant is an option which is considered for various cancer conditions, especially blood cancers. Examples include:Leukaemia.Lymphoma (Hodgkin's lymphoma or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma).Myeloma.Your specialist will advise when it may be an appropriate option. As a rule, it is not often a first-line treatment.Conventional chemotherapy or other treatments tend to be used first. However, the treatment of cancer and leukaemia is a changing and developing area of medicine. Techniques such as stem cell transplant continue to be refined and improved and may be considered in various different circumstances.The higher doses of chemotherapy and radiotherapy that can be used in conjunction with a stem cell transplant can improve the chance of a cure for some conditions in certain circumstances.There is now a great deal of research about using stem cell transplants for many other conditions. For example:For damage to heart tissue (for example, after a heart attack).For damage to the nervous system (for example, dementia or Parkinson's disease).For the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers.In the management of sickle cell disease.Where are stem cells obtained from?An autologous transplantThis means that the stem cells used for the transplant come from your own body. They are usually collected when you are free of any sign of disease (when you are in remission) following conventional chemotherapy or other treatments. The stem cells can be used soon after being collected. They can also be frozen, stored and used in the future if needed. An autologous stem cell transplant is also called stem cell support, as the stem cells come from your own body. So, strictly speaking, it is not a transplant from a donor.An allogenic transplantThis means the stem cells used for the transplant come from someone else - a donor. This is often a close relative such as a brother or sister where there is a good chance of a close match. Unrelated donors are sometimes matched to people needing a transplant.Stem cells can be collected:From the bone marrow. This involves a small operation to collect some marrow from the pelvic bone.From the blood. Some stem cells occur in the blood (most are in the bone marrow). The stem cells in the blood can be collected (harvested) by a machine called a cell separator. The blood flow is diverted from a vein in the arm to pass through the machine which separates out the stem cells. The procedure takes about 4-6 hours. Medicines are given for a few days before this procedure to stimulate the body to make more stem cells in the bone marrow which spill out into the blood.From blood taken from the umbilical cord of a newborn baby.How is a stem cell transplant performed?It is very similar to a blood transfusion. Following the intense course of chemotherapy (and sometimes radiotherapy), the solution containing stem cells is given into one of your veins via a drip. The stem cells travel through your bloodstream and end up in your bone marrow. Here they start to make blood cells.It can take several weeks for your bone marrow to recover, to take up the transplanted stem cells and to make enough new blood cells. During this time you will need to be in hospital and be closely monitored. You may need several blood transfusions during this time until you are making enough blood cells. Antibiotic medicines are given to minimise the risk of infection. Also, medicines are given to help the stem cells to multiply as quickly as possible.Stem cell transplant risksThere is a risk of serious problems with a stem cell transplant. For example:Infection is the main risk. Following the intense chemotherapy, and before the time your bone marrow is working again, you have very low immunity. During this time you are at risk of serious and life-threatening infections. This is why antibiotics are given and you will be nursed away from other people until your bone marrow recovers. This can take several weeks.Bleeding problems from the low level of platelets after the chemotherapy.It you have a transplant from a donor, there is some risk that the match will not be perfect, and the donor cells may react with your body's cells. This is called graft-versus-host disease. This is not always serious but sometimes it can be.Rarely, the transplanted stem cells fail to work.There is a risk of short-term and long-term side-effects from intense chemotherapy (and/or radiotherapy).Your specialist will discuss with you the risks and possible side-effects of a stem cell transplant.Previous article   Myeloma Next article  Bone Marrow Biopsy and Aspiration  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: diagnosis and management; NICE Guideline (July 2016)Hodgkin's lymphoma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis treatment and follow-up; European Society for Medical Oncology (2014)Guideline on the Management of Primary Resistant and Relapsed Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma; British Committee for Standards in Haematology and the British Society of Blood and Marrow Transplantation (2013)Multiple myeloma: diagnosis, treatment and follow-up; ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline (2017)Myeloma: diagnosis and management; NICE Guidance, (February 2016 - last updated October 2018)Haematological cancers: improving outcomes; NICE Guidance (May 2016)Ansell SM; Hodgkin lymphoma: 2016 update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and management. Am J Hematol. 2016 Jun91(4):434-42. doi: 10.1002/ajh.24272.Bone Marrow Transplantation and Peripheral Blood Stem Cell Transplantation; National Cancer Institute (US)Inamoto Y, Lee SJ; Late effects of blood and marrow transplantation. Haematologica. 2017 Apr102(4):614-625. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2016.150250. Epub 2017 Feb 23.Zhang Y, Deng H, Tang Z; Efficacy of Cellular Therapy for Diabetic Foot Ulcer: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Clinical Trials. Cell Transplant. 2017 Dec26(12):1931-1939. doi: 10.1177/0963689717738013.Related InformationCancer Care ProGeneral Aspects of Chemotherapy ProAcute Lymphoblastic Leukaemia (Symptoms and Treatment) ProMyeloma ProPrescribing in Palliative Care Pro  What are the early warning signs of blood cancer?    4 minutes reading time  27-Sep-18  What is blood?  6 months ago i saw a Rheumatologist who diagnosed me with Polymyalgia Rheumatica, whilst doing the blood test he came across a paroprotein in my blood which the lab had said was too small to...   carol25143Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Laurence Knott Peer reviewed by  Dr Adrian Bonsall Document ID  4885 (v43)  Last updated on   26 March 2018 Status  Archived The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  MyelomaNext article Bone Marrow Biopsy and Aspiration Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Stem Cell Transplant      close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/cancer/blood-cancers/stem-cell-transplantCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


