# Thyroid Problems (Thyroid and Parathyroid Disorders) | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Hormones  Thyroid and Parathyroid Problems Last updated by Dr Caroline Wiggins   Peer reviewed by Dr Surangi Mendis  Last updated 31 Oct 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Underactive Thyroid Gland (Hypothyroidism)      Thyroid Cancer      Hyperparathyroidism      Hypoparathyroidism In this series     Underactive Thyroid Gland (Hypothyroidism)      Thyroid Cancer      Hyperparathyroidism      Hypoparathyroidism This leaflet gives a brief overview of the thyroid and parathyroid glands and the common medical problems which can occur with these.In this article   What are the thyroid and parathyroid glands?   Types of thyroid disorders   Thyroid disorder symptoms   Thyroid disorder tests   Types of parathyroid disorders   Parathyroid disorder symptoms   Parathyroid disorder tests   Where is the thyroid gland?   Thyroid functions   How does the thyroid work?   Where are the parathyroid glands?   Parathyroid functions   How do the parathyroid glands work? In This Article     Thyroid and Parathyroid ProblemsIn this article What are the thyroid and parathyroid glands?  Types of thyroid disorders  Thyroid disorder symptoms  Thyroid disorder tests  Types of parathyroid disorders  Parathyroid disorder symptoms  Parathyroid disorder tests  Where is the thyroid gland?  Thyroid functions  How does the thyroid work?  Where are the parathyroid glands?  Parathyroid functions  How do the parathyroid glands work? What are the thyroid and parathyroid glands?Both the thyroid and parathyroid glands are endocrine glands. This means they make and release (secrete) hormones. Hormones are chemicals which are produced by the body and released into the bloodstream.They act as messengers, affecting cells and tissues in distant parts of your body. Thyroid hormones affect the body's metabolic rate and the levels of certain minerals in the blood. The hormone produced by the parathyroid also helps to control the amount of these essential minerals.Types of thyroid disordersCancer of the thyroid (thyroid cancer).Thyroid swelling (goitre).Thyroid nodules. These are lumps in the thyroid gland, which are usually non-cancerous (benign).Overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism).Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism).Thyroid disorder symptomsBecause the thyroid gland produces hormones which travel in the blood and affect body systems, a problem with the gland usually leads to symptoms elsewhere in the body.Symptoms and signs vary depending on the thyroid disease or problem - see the individual leaflets linked above for details.Thyroid disorder testsThere are a number of tests (investigations) which may be carried out to check the thyroid gland. Which test is done depends on the symptoms or signs which you have. See the leaflets on the individual conditions for the tests done in each particular problem.Tests which might be done for people with thyroid issues include:Blood tests. This includes thyroid function tests and thyroid antibody tests.An ultrasound scan of the neck.Special thyroid scans. See the separate leaflet called Thyroid Scans and Uptake Tests for more information.Taking a sample of tissue for analysis (a biopsy). Our picks for Thyroid and Parathyroid Problems How to tell if you have an underactive thyroidHypothyroidism - an underactive thyroid gland - can result in everything from weight gain to dep...   5min  How to tell if you have an underactive thyroid   5min  Surprising facts about thyroid problems   5min  The importance of a healthy thyroid   4min  Surprising facts about thyroid problems   5minTypes of parathyroid disordersOveractive parathyroid (hyperparathyroidism).Underactive parathyroid (hypoparathyroidism).Tumours of the parathyroid, such as parathyroid adenoma and parathyroid cancer.Parathyroid disorder symptomsAs with the thyroid, the parathyroid glands produce hormones which travel in the blood and affect body systems, so a problem with the gland usually leads to symptoms elsewhere in the body. Symptoms and signs vary depending on the parathyroid problem - see the individual leaflets linked above for details.Parathyroid disorder testsThere are a number of tests (investigations) which may be carried out to check on the parathyroid glands. Which test is done depends on the symptoms or signs which you have. Possible tests for people with parathyroid symptoms include:Blood tests:Test of the parathyroid hormone level.Tests for levels of calcium, phosphate and vitamin D.Tests to check your kidney function.Thyroid function tests and thyroid antibody tests.X-rays.Bone density (DXA) scan.Ultrasound scans.Taking a sample of tissue for analysis (a biopsy).See the leaflets on the individual conditions for the tests done in each particular problem.Where is the thyroid gland?The thyroid gland is found in the front part of your neck. It is made up of two lobes - the right and the left lobes. These two lobes are joined by a small bridge of thyroid tissue called the isthmus. The two lobes lie on either side of your windpipe (trachea).Thyroid functionsThe thyroid gland makes three hormones that it releases (secretes) into the bloodstream. Two of these hormones, called thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), increase your body's metabolic rate. Essentially, the body's metabolic rate is how quickly the cells in your body use the energy stored within them.Thyroid hormones make cells use more energy. By controlling how much energy our cells use, thyroid hormones also help to regulate our body temperature. Heat is released when energy is used, increasing our body temperature. Thyroid hormones also play a role in making proteins, the building blocks of the body's cells. They also increase the use of the body's fat and glucose stores.In order to make T3 and T4, the thyroid gland needs iodine, a substance found in the food we eat. T4 is called T4 because it contains four atoms of iodine. T3 contains three atoms of iodine. In the cells and tissues of the body most T4 is converted to T3. T3 is the more active hormone; it influences the activity of all the cells and tissues of your body.The other hormone that the thyroid makes is called calcitonin. This helps to control the levels of calcium and phosphorus in the blood. These minerals are needed, among other things, to keep bones strong and healthy.How does the thyroid work?The main job of the thyroid gland is to produce hormones T4 and T3. To do this the thyroid gland has to take a form of iodine from the bloodstream into the thyroid gland itself. This substance then undergoes a number of different chemical reactions which result in the production of T3 and T4.The activity of the thyroid is controlled by hormones produced by two parts of the brain - the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland. The hypothalamus receives input from the body about the state of many different bodily functions.When the hypothalamus senses that levels of T3 and T4 are low, or that the body's metabolic rate is low, it releases a hormone called thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH). TRH travels to the pituitary gland via the connecting blood vessels. TRH stimulates the pituitary gland to release (secrete) thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH).Location of pituitary glandTSH is released from the pituitary gland into the bloodstream and travels to the thyroid gland. Here, TSH causes cells within the thyroid gland to make more T3 and T4. T3 and T4 are then released into the bloodstream to increase metabolic activity in the body's cells.High levels of T3 stop the hypothalamus and pituitary gland from secreting more of their hormones. In turn this stops the thyroid gland producing T3 and T4. This system ensures that T3 and T4 should only be made when their levels are too low.Calcitonin is released by the thyroid gland if the amount of calcium in the bloodstream is high. Calcitonin decreases the amount of calcium and phosphorus in the blood. It does this by slowing the normal process of bone breakdown. Slowing this process reduces the amount of calcium being released into the bloodstream.Calcitonin also accelerates the amount of calcium and phosphorus taken up as new bone is formed. Calcitonin works together with parathyroid hormone to regulate calcium levels (see below in the parathyroid section for full explanation).Where are the parathyroid glands?The body has four parathyroid glands. They are small, pea-sized glands, located in the neck just behind the butterfly-shaped thyroid gland. Two parathyroid glands lie behind each lobe of the thyroid gland.Parathyroid functionsThe parathyroid glands release a hormone called parathyroid hormone. This hormone helps to control the levels of three minerals in the body: calcium, phosphorus and magnesium. Parathyroid hormone functions/effects in the body include:It causes the release of calcium from bones.It causes calcium to be taken up (absorbed) into the blood from the intestine.It stops the kidneys from getting rid of (excreting) calcium in the urine.It causes the kidneys to excrete phosphate in the urine.It increases blood levels of magnesium.How do the parathyroid glands work?Normally parathyroid hormone release is triggered when the level of calcium in the blood is low. When the calcium level rises and is back to normal, the release of parathyroid hormone from the parathyroids is suppressed.However, parathyroid hormone and calcitonin work together to control calcium levels in the blood. The blood calcium level is the main trigger for the release of these hormones.When the calcium level is high in the bloodstream, the thyroid gland releases calcitonin. Calcitonin slows bone breakdown, decreasing blood calcium levels. When calcium levels decrease, this stimulates the parathyroid gland to release parathyroid hormone.Parathyroid hormone encourages the normal process of bone breakdown (essential for maintenance and growth of the bone), which releases calcium into the bloodstream. Parathyroid hormone acts against the effects of calcitonin. By having two hormones with opposing actions, the level of calcium in the blood can be carefully regulated.Parathyroid hormone also acts on the kidneys. Here it slows down the amount of calcium and magnesium filtered from the blood into the urine. Parathyroid hormone also stimulates the kidneys to make calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D. Calcitriol helps to increase the amount of calcium, magnesium and phosphorus absorbed from your guts (intestines) into the blood. Next article  Underactive Thyroid Gland (Hypothyroidism)  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Thyroid disease: assessment and management; NICE (November 2019 - last updated October 2023)The Endocrine System - an overview; Thyroid UKHypothyroidism; NICE CKS, May 2021 (UK access only)Hyperparathyroidism (primary): diagnosis, assessment and initial management; NICE guideline (May 2019)Related InformationSurprising facts about thyroid problemsUnderactive Thyroid Gland (Hypothyroidism)Thyroid CancerHyperparathyroidismIodine Deficiency  How to tell if you have an underactive thyroid    5 minutes reading time  08-Oct-18  Surprising facts about thyroid problems    5 minutes reading time  10-Apr-18  The importance of a healthy thyroid    4 minutes reading time  31-Oct-17  I have had recurring infections so doc sent me for bloods and then repeat bloods which show slightly raised calcium 2.67, low pth 1.6 and vitimin d deficiency at <10. Doc thought pth was going to be...   joanne70506Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Caroline Wiggins Peer reviewed by  Dr Surangi Mendis Document ID  12524 (v7)  Last updated on   31 October 2023 Next review date  29 October 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Next article Underactive Thyroid Gland (Hypothyroidism) Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Thyroid Problems (Thyroid and Parathyroid Disorders)     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/hormones/thyroid-and-parathyroid-glandsCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


