# Tummy Tuck (Abdominoplasty) | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Healthy Living    Obesity and Weight Loss  Tummy Tuck Abdominoplasty Last updated by Dr Jacqueline Payne   Peer reviewed by Dr Helen Huins  Last updated 24 Mar 2016         Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Obesity and Weight Loss      Weight Gain      Childhood Obesity      Weight Loss Surgery      Orlistat (Weight Loss Medicine) In this series     Obesity and Weight Loss      Weight Gain      Childhood Obesity      Weight Loss Surgery      Orlistat (Weight Loss Medicine) This page has been archived. It has not been updated since 24/03/2016. External links and references may no longer work.In this procedure excess skin and fat can be removed, abdominal contours and scars improved, and the muscles tightened.In this article   The standard abdominoplasty   Who is a candidate?   What are the consequences?   What are the limitations?   What are the risks?   What would you need to do before the operation?   What you should expect at the time of the operation   Recuperation In This Article     Tummy TuckAbdominoplastyIn this article The standard abdominoplasty  Who is a candidate?  What are the consequences?  What are the limitations?  What are the risks?  What would you need to do before the operation?  What you should expect at the time of the operation  Recuperation This leaflet is provided by the British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons, the professional body responsible for the advancement of education and safety in aesthetic plastic surgery.This is also called an abdominoplasty or tummy tuck. Different combinations are combined in the various procedures.The standard abdominoplastyThe excess skin and fat of the abdominal wall between the pubic area and the umbilicus (navel) is removed leaving the umbilicus in place. The skin of the abdominal wall at the level of the umbilicus is then drawn down to suture it at the pubic level. The patient is left with a long, usually curved scar across the lower part of the abdominal wall at the level of the pubic hair. There is also a scar around the umbilicus. Any looseness of the muscles of the abdominal wall or hernia is repaired at the same time.Liposuction may be carried out during this procedure to thin the abdominal wall, or as a separate procedure either before or after the abdominoplasty.In the mini-abdominoplasty surplus skin below the umbilicus is removed leaving a low abdominal scar at the level of the pubic hair. The umbilicus is not disturbed but liposuction is usually carried out at the same time as the procedure to reduce the thickness of fat in the abdominal wall and any laxity or hernia of the abdominal wall is repaired at the same time.In the extended abdominoplasty surplus skin and fat of the loins and back are also removed so that the scar extends around the flanks on to the lower back.The endoscopic abdominoplasty is used to tighten the muscles of the abdominal wall to give a better contour and is carried out through a short transverse incision above the pubic hair. Skin is not removed but liposuction can be carried out at the same time.The apronectomy is a modification of the mini-abdominoplasty for patients who have a large excess of skin and fat hanging down over the pubic area. In this procedure only the surplus skin and are removed. The scar is long and transverse extending from one side of the apron to the other.Modifications to the abdominoplasty skin excision are made when the patient has particular problems associated with scars from previous operations.An alternative procedure which should always be considered instead of many of the above is liposuction on its own. This reduces fat and causes just a little retraction of the skin.Who is a candidate?Anyone who has abdominal skin and fat may be a candidate. With women the problem is usually caused by pregnancy, but is greatly aggravated by weight loss. The muscles of the abdominal wall may be weakened by pregnancy and actually pulled apart in the middle (divarification of recti). Men are similarly affected by weight loss. Stretch marks (striae) are simply the scars which are left after extreme stretching of the skin. They are usually most apparent on the lower part of the abdominal wall. There is no specific treatment for these stretch marks, but many of them are excised in an abdominal reduction and those that are left are tightened making them look less obvious.Patients that are unable to tighten the abdominal wall skin with exercise or wish to achieve a smoother flatter abdomen will also benefit.What are the consequences?The patient is left with noticeable scars. The main scar runs transversely across the lower part of the abdomen (see illustrations above) and in a standard abdominal reduction there will be a scar around the umbilicus. Other or different scars may be left where the patient has particular individual problems. Some patients make better scars than others and in any case all scars are red initially. It is essential that the patient understands where these scars will be and should discuss them with the surgeon. Although we try to hide them beneath underwear and swimwear, fashions can change making previously covered scars visible.There is numbness in the lower part of the abdominal wall after surgery. This is usually temporary but could be permanent. Swelling above the scar is usually present due to a collection of tissue fluid which normally drains to the groin. This swelling or oedema settles within a few months.Ready to hit your weight loss goals?Find a range of services to suit you, from medication through to managed programs Book now What are the limitations?The skin is usually tightened downwards and this does not tighten the waist. If this is desired then one can consider removing skin vertically, but one should bear in mind that vertical scars of the abdomen are less good. The tissue of the abdominal wall is generally fatter than the groin and if liposuction is not carried out a fatty bulge may remain above the scar.The beneficial effects of the operation will last well. However, the effects will be maintained better if the patient keeps exercising the muscles and the weight steady. A further pregnancy will of course stretch the skin again, although probably not to the same degree.What are the risks?The standard abdominoplasty is a large procedure requiring two to four days of hospitalisation. Drains are removed when they stop draining blood and serum a few days after the procedure. This fluid can reaccumulate after the drains are removed requiring drainage or aspiration.Healing can be slow particularly in the tighter central part of the wound and sometimes dressings are needed for a few weeks. This is more common in patients who are overweight and who smoke. This tends to leave more obvious scars which are tethered - these can be revised.Secondary procedures are sometimes carried out to tidy up the results and will involve scar revision and limited liposuction. Displacement of the umbilicus to one side has been over-publicised and is rare. Deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolus are rare complications of any operation, including this one.What would you need to do before the operation?If you are overweight you would be well advised to diet as best results are obtained in people who are the correct weight for their height. If you are taking the contraceptive pill you should stop doing so for six weeks before surgery and use an alternative method in order to reduce the risk of thrombosis. If you smoke there is a greater risk of chest infection and in particular healing of the abdominal wound is less good.What you should expect at the time of the operationYou will need to be in hospital for one to three days. When you wake up for your operation it is likely that you will be having a transfusion of salt solution. This is quite normal and is to provide you with fluid you need whilst you are not drinking. You are likely to have drainage tubes coming out of each side of the lower abdomen which are there to drain any collection of blood or serum. You can expect some moderately severe pain for which you will be given painkilling tablets or injections. You will be asked to keep your knees and hips bent to take the strain off your stitches.RecuperationOveractivity in the early days reduces healing and increases fluid accumulation. Light activities are comfortable in 10 to 20 days. Sports will not be possible for about 6 weeks particularly when the muscles have been strengthened with sutures. A corset is usually helpful to reduce the swelling and improve comfort in the first month.Content used with permission from the British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons website: Tummy Tuck (Abdominoplasty). Copyright for this leaflet is with the BAAPS.DisclaimerThis leaflet is designed to supply useful information but is not to be regarded as advice specific to any particular case. It does not replace the need for a thorough consultation and all prospective patients should seek the advice of a suitably qualified medical practitioner. The BAAPS accepts no liability for any decision taken by the reader in respect of the treatment they decide to undertake.Previous article   Orlistat (Weight Loss Medicine)Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Flegal KM, Kit BK, Orpana H, et al; Association of all-cause mortality with overweight and obesity using standard body mass index categories: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 2013 Jan 2309(1):71-82. doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.113905.Obesity in the UK: A psychological perspective; British Psychological Society, 2011Reducing obesity and improving diet: Policy; Dept of Health, March 2013Obese, overweight with risk factors: liraglutide (Saxenda); NICE Evidence Summary, June 2017Healthy lives, healthy people. A call to action on obesity in England; Dept of Health, 13 October 2011Body Mass Index (BMI) charts for girls and boys age 2-18; Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health and Dept of HealthPosition statement: Childhood obesity; Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, 2012Childhood overweight and obesity; World Health OrganizationOude Luttikhuis H, Baur L, Jansen H, et al; Interventions for treating obesity in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jan 21(1):CD001872. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001872.pub2.Arterburn DE, Courcoulas AP; Bariatric surgery for obesity and metabolic conditions in adults. BMJ. 2014 Aug 27349:g3961. doi: 10.1136/bmj.g3961.Colquitt JL, Pickett K, Loveman E, et al; Surgery for weight loss in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Aug 88:CD003641. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003641.pub4.Sjostrom L; Review of the key results from the Swedish Obese Subjects (SOS) trial - a prospective controlled intervention study of bariatric surgery. J Intern Med. 2013 Mar273(3):219-34. doi: 10.1111/joim.12012. Epub 2013 Feb 8.Hsia DS, Fallon SC, Brandt ML; Adolescent bariatric surgery. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2012 Aug166(8):757-66. doi: 10.1001/archpediatrics.2012.1011.Hafekost K, Lawrence D, Mitrou F, et al; Tackling overweight and obesity: does the public health message match the science? BMC Med. 2013 Feb 1811:41. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-11-41.Calle EE, Rodriguez C, Walker-Thurmond K, et al; Overweight, obesity, and mortality from cancer in a prospectively studied cohort of U.S. adults. N Engl J Med. 2003 Apr 24348(17):1625-38.About Obesity: Body Mass Index; MEND - Mytime ActiveMEND; (Mind, Exercise, Nutrition ... Do it!)Yeh JS, Kushner RF, Schiff GD; Obesity and Management of Weight Loss. N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep 22375(12):1187-9. doi: 10.1056/NEJMclde1515935.Related InformationBariatric Surgery ProWeight Loss SurgeryOrlistat (Weight Loss Medicine)Weight Loss (Weight Reduction)Obesity and Weight Loss  Can probiotics treat obesity and diabetes?     5 minutes reading time  13-Dec-23  What is gastric sleeve surgery?    7 minutes reading time  08-Feb-23  Does BMI matter?    4 minutes reading time  05-Aug-20  Does eating spicy food help you lose weight?    4 minutes reading time  10-Apr-18  Hi everyone. I'm new to the forum, but thought I would begin this conversation for anyone who's going through similar. After 5 years of appointments, blood tests and weight loss, I am currently at...   alice38561Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Last updated by   Dr Jacqueline Payne Peer reviewed by  Dr Helen Huins Document ID  29224 (v1)  Last updated on   24 March 2016 Status  Archived Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Orlistat (Weight Loss Medicine)Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Tummy Tuck (Abdominoplasty)     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/healthy-living/obesity-overweight/tummy-tuck-abdominoplastyCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


