# Types of Epilepsy and Seizures | Epilepsy Diagnosis and Tests | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Brain and Nerves    Epilepsy and Seizures  Types of Epilepsy and Seizures Last updated by Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP  Last updated 17 Jun 2022   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Epilepsy and Seizures      Electroencephalograph (EEG)      Epilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment)      Epilepsy with Focal Seizures      Epilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)      Epilepsy Medication and Side-effects (Treatments for Epilepsy)  In this series     Epilepsy and Seizures      Electroencephalograph (EEG)      Epilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment)      Epilepsy with Focal Seizures      Epilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)      Epilepsy Medication and Side-effects (Treatments for Epilepsy)  If you had a collapse or an episode of odd behaviour or some similar event, it is possible that you had an epileptic seizure. This leaflet gives some information about what your doctor may wish to know and what tests may be advised after such an event.In this article   What is a seizure?   Different types of epileptic seizures   Getting the right diagnosis   The specialist and tests   What if it is a seizure? In This Article     Types of Epilepsy and SeizuresIn this article What is a seizure?  Different types of epileptic seizures  Getting the right diagnosis  The specialist and tests  What if it is a seizure? What is a seizure?A seizure is a short episode of symptoms caused by a burst of abnormal electrical activity in the brain. Typically, a seizure lasts from a few seconds to a few minutes.If you have epilepsy, it means that you have had repeated seizures. If you have a single seizure, it does not necessarily mean that you have epilepsy. About 1 in 20 people have a seizure at some time in their lives. It may be the only one that occurs. The definition of epilepsy is more than one seizure.For more information, see the separate leaflet called Epilepsy and Seizures.Suffer from migraines?Book an appointment today to see what treatment options are available near you Book now Different types of epileptic seizuresSeizures are divided into two main types - generalised and focal (used to be called partial). (There are also other uncommon types of seizure.) If you have epilepsy you usually have recurrences of the same type of seizure. However, some people have different types of seizure at different times.Generalised seizuresThese occur if the abnormal electrical activity affects all or most of the brain. The symptoms tend to be general and involve much of your body. There are various types of generalised seizure:Tonic-clonic seizures (which used to be called grand mal seizures) are the most common type of generalised seizure. With this type of seizure your whole body stiffens, you lose consciousness, and then your body shakes (convulses) due to uncontrollable muscle contractions.Absence seizures (previously sometimes known as petit mal seizures) lead to a brief loss of consciousness or awareness. There is no convulsion, you do not fall over and they usually last only seconds. Even though there is no shaking, absence seizures are also 'generalised onset' seizures, because they start in both sides of the brain at the same time. They are more common in children than in adults.Myoclonic seizures involve a sudden contraction of the muscles, which causes erking movements. These can affect the whole body but often occur in just one or both arms.Tonic seizures cause a brief loss of consciousness and you may become stiff and fall to the ground.Atonic seizures cause you to become limp and to collapse, often with only a brief loss of consciousness.Focal seizuresIn focal seizures the burst of electrical activity starts in, and stays in, one part of the brain. Therefore, you tend to have localised (focal) symptoms. Different parts of the brain control different functions. This means symptoms depend on which part of the brain is affected.Simple focal seizures are one type. You may have muscular jerks or strange sensations in one arm or leg. You may develop an odd taste, or pins and needles in one part of your body. You do not lose consciousness or awareness.Complex focal seizures are another type. These can start in any part of the brain. However, they most often begin in one of your two temporal lobes - you have one on each side of your brain behind your temples. If the seizures come from this part of the brain, they are sometimes called temporal lobe epilepsy. Depending on the part of the brain affected, you may behave strangely for a few seconds or minutes. For example, you may fiddle with an object, or mumble, or wander aimlessly. In addition, you may have odd emotions, fears, feelings, visions, or sensations.Complex focal seizures differ from simple focal seizures in that your consciousness is affected. You may not remember having a seizure.Sometimes a focal seizure develops into a generalised seizure. This is called a secondary generalised seizure.Febrile seizures (febrile convulsions)About 1 in 20 children will have a febrile seizure the time they reach 6 years old. They are most common between the ages of 6 months and 3 years, and are always linked to having a fever (usually due to a viral infection).Febrile seizures are not the same as epilepsy. Most children who have a febrile seizure will not develop epilepsy, and many will never have another febrile seizure. However, if your child has a 'complex' febrile seizure (which lasts for more than 10 minutes or also involves other symptoms such as weakness on one site of the body) they may have a slightly higher risk of developing epielpsy.You can find out more from our leaflet called Febrile Seizure (Febrile Convulsion).Getting the right diagnosisThe most important part of making a diagnosis is to have a clear description of what happened. This is both from the person affected and, if possible, from an eye-witness.It can be difficult for a doctor to say definitely that you have had a seizure if the description is not typical. For example, a faint can sometimes cause brief stiffening of the body followed by a few jerks of the arms and legs. This may appear to an onlooker to be a short seizure; however, it is not a seizure. A doctor may ask questions to try to find the cause of what happened. If your doctor is unsure about the cause of the event, you may be referred to a specialist.If you have a suspected seizure, your doctor should refer you urgently to an epilepsy specialist, aiming for an appointment with two weeks. They should also talk to you about:How to recognise another seizure.Any steps you can take to cut your chance of another seizure.How to keep yourself safe if you have another seizure, and first aid steps to take.Who you should contact if you have another seizure while waiting for your specialist appointment.The specialist and testsThe specialist will want to go over the story of what happened. Below is a list of the sort of questions that you may be asked. Try to go over the answers before your appointment:What exactly happened before, during and after the event?Did you lose consciousness?Were you confused before or after the event?Did any parts of your body shake? If so, for how long, and in what way?Did you bite your tongue or pass urine?How long did it last?Did you have any unusual feelings, sensations or emotions before the event?Do you have any other symptoms at all, even apparently unrelated?Had you taken any alcohol, medicines or street drugs before the event?Has anything like this ever happened before?Does anyone in the family have epilepsy?Have you had any head injuries or illnesses affecting your brain in the past?Did you feel well before the event or did you feel poorly, light-headed, hot or distressed?Can you think of anything to explain what happened?It is very helpful to the specialist if a person who saw what happened goes with you to the appointment. Sometimes the specialist can give a cause of the event from the description and examination alone. Sometimes further tests are advised. These may include the following:A brain scan - usually a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan or computerised tomography (CT) scan - can show abnormalities affecting the structure of different areas of the brain.Electroencephalograph (EEG). This test records the electrical activity of the brain. Special stickers are placed on various parts of the scalp. They are connected to the EEG machine. This amplifies the tiny electrical messages given off by the brain and records their pattern on paper or computer. The test is painless. Some types of seizure produce typical EEG patterns. However, a normal recording does not rule out epilepsy, and not all EEG abnormalities are related to epilepsy.Electrocardiogram (ECG). Sometimes abnormal heart rhythms can lead to seizures which can be mistaken for epilepsy. So your doctor may arrange this tracing of your heart.Blood tests and other tests may be advised to check on your general well-being. They may also look for other possible causes of the event.Although helpful, tests are not foolproof. It is possible to have epilepsy with normal test results. Also, if an abnormality is found on a brain scan, it does not prove that it causes seizures. However, tests may help to decide if the event was a seizure or caused by something else.Sometimes no firm cause can be found to explain the event. A doctor may advise to wait and see if it happens again if there is doubt about the diagnosis.What if it is a seizure?Even if a seizure is diagnosed, it may be the only one you ever have. For this reason epilepsy is not usually diagnosed after a single seizure. The definition of epilepsy is recurrent seizures. See the other leaflets in this series for information about the different types of epilepsy.Previous article   Epilepsy and Seizures Next article  Electroencephalograph (EEG)  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Diagnosis and management of epilepsy in adults; Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network - SIGN (2015 - updated 2018)Transient loss of consciousness ('blackouts') management in adults and young people; NICE Clinical Guideline (August 2010 last updated November 2023)Epilepsies in children, young people and adults; NICE guidance (2022)Scheffer IE, Berkovic S, Capovilla G, et al; ILAE classification of the epilepsies: Position paper of the ILAE Commission for Classification and Terminology. Epilepsia. 2017 Apr58(4):512-521. doi: 10.1111/epi.13709. Epub 2017 Mar 8.Related InformationEpilepsy and SeizuresEpilepsy with Tonic-clonic Seizures (Causes and Treatment)Epilepsy with Focal SeizuresEpilepsy with Absence Seizures (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment)Electroencephalograph (EEG)  Epilepsy and driving: what you need to know    4 minutes reading time  05-Apr-23  What to do when someone has an epileptic seizure    6 minutes reading time  11-Feb-19  Is it safe to take epilepsy medication during pregnancy?    6 minutes reading time  16-May-18  Hi everyone,What are the most valuable resources you've come across to manage your health journey? Is there any information in particular that's been the most useful? I'd love to learn from everyone'...   bright48990Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Document ID  4432 (v44)  Last updated on   17 June 2022 Next review date  16 June 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Epilepsy and SeizuresNext article Electroencephalograph (EEG) Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Types of Epilepsy and Seizures      close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/brain-nerves/epilepsy-and-seizures/types-of-epilepsy-and-seizuresCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


