# Vitamin B12 Deficiency and Pernicious Anaemia | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Allergies, Blood & Immune System    Anaemia  Vitamin B12 Deficiency and Pernicious Anaemia Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP   Peer reviewed by Dr Laurence Knott  Last updated 16 Feb 2021   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Anaemia      Diets Suitable for People with Anaemia      Folic Acid Deficiency      Iron-deficiency Anaemia      Macrocytosis and Macrocytic Anaemia In this series     Anaemia      Diets Suitable for People with Anaemia      Folic Acid Deficiency      Iron-deficiency Anaemia      Macrocytosis and Macrocytic Anaemia Cells in other parts of the body may be affected if you lack vitamin B12. Other symptoms that may occur include a sore mouth and tongue.In this article   What is vitamin B12 deficiency?   Vitamin B12 deficiency symptoms   What are causes of vitamin B12 deficiency?   How is vitamin B12 deficiency diagnosed?   Vitamin B12 deficiency treatment   Follow-up In This Article     Vitamin B12 Deficiency and Pernicious AnaemiaIn this article What is vitamin B12 deficiency?  Vitamin B12 deficiency symptoms  What are causes of vitamin B12 deficiency?  How is vitamin B12 deficiency diagnosed?  Vitamin B12 deficiency treatment  Follow-up What is vitamin B12 deficiency?Vitamin B12 is essential for life. It is needed to make new cells in the body, such as the many new red blood cells which are made every day. Vitamin B12 is found in meat, fish, eggs and milk - but not in fruit or vegetables. A normal balanced diet contains enough vitamin B12. A lack of vitamin B12 leads to anaemia and sometimes to other problems.Vitamin B12 deficiency symptomsSymptoms due to anaemiaThese are caused by the reduced amount of oxygen in the body.Common symptoms include tiredness, lethargy, feeling faint and becoming breathless.Less common symptoms include headaches, a 'thumping heart' (palpitations), altered taste, loss of appetite, and ringing in the ears (tinnitus).You may look pale.Other symptomsCells in other parts of the body may be affected if you lack vitamin B12. Other symptoms that may occur include a sore mouth and tongue.If left untreated, problems with nerves and psychological problems can develop. Psychological problems may include depression, confusion, and difficulty with memory, or even dementia. Nerve problems may include numbness, pins and needles, vision changes and unsteadiness.What are causes of vitamin B12 deficiency?Pernicious anaemiaNormally, when you eat foods with vitamin B12, the vitamin combines with a protein called intrinsic factor in the stomach. The combined vitamin B12/intrinsic factor is then absorbed into the body further down the gut at the end of the small intestine. (Intrinsic factor is made by cells in the lining of the stomach and is needed for vitamin B12 to be absorbed.)Pernicious anaemia is the most common cause of B12 deficiency in the UK. It is classed as an autoimmune disease. The immune system normally makes antibodies to attack bacteria, viruses and other germs.If you have an autoimmune disease, the immune system makes antibodies against certain tissues of your body. If you have pernicious anaemia, antibodies are formed against your intrinsic factor, or against the cells in your stomach which make intrinsic factor.This stops intrinsic factor from attaching to vitamin B12 and so the vitamin cannot be absorbed into your body. It is thought that something triggers the immune system to make antibodies against intrinsic factor. The trigger is not known.Pernicious anaemia usually develops over the age of 50. Women are more commonly affected than men and it tends to run in families. It occurs more commonly in people who have other autoimmune diseases. For example, thyroid diseases, Addison's disease and vitiligo (a condition where white patches develop on skin). The antibodies which cause pernicious anaemia can be detected by a blood test to confirm the diagnosis.Stomach or gut problemsVarious problems of the stomach or gut can be a cause of vitamin B12 deficiency. They are all uncommon causes. They include:Surgery to remove the stomach or the end of the small intestine. This will mean absorption of vitamin B12 may not be possible.Some diseases that affect the end of the small intestine where vitamin B12 is absorbed may affect the absorption of the vitamin - for example, Crohn's disease.Some conditions of the stomach may affect the production of intrinsic factor which is needed to combine with vitamin B12 to be absorbed - for example, atrophic gastritis (where the lining of the stomach is thinned).MedicinesCertain medicines used for other conditions may affect the absorbtion of vitamin B12. The most common example is metformin which is a medicine often used for diabetes. Other medicines include colchicine, neomycin and some anticonvulsants used to treat epilepsy.Note: long-term use of medicines that affect stomach acid production, such as H2 blockers and proton pump inhibitors, can worsen vitamin B12 deficiency. This is because stomach acid is needed to release vitamin B12 bound to proteins in the food you eat. However, such medicines are not causes of vitamin B12 deficiency.Dietary causesIt is unusual to lack vitamin B12 if you eat a normal balanced diet. Strict vegans who consume no animal or dairy products may not eat enough vitamin B12. Some foods are fortified with vitamin B12 - for example, some soy products, some breakfast cereals and some breads.How is vitamin B12 deficiency diagnosed?The initial blood tests will include a full blood count (FBC) to see whether you are anaemic. The full blood count test will also include a level called the mean cell volume (MCV), which is raised with vitamin B12 deficiency but also in some other conditions.The level of vitamin B12 can be measured by a blood test.However some people may have symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency despite normal vitamin B12 blood test results, or may have low blood levels despite having no symptoms. Therefore the results of these blood test need to be interpreted together with your symptoms.The commonly used blood test for vitamin B12 measures the total amount of vitamin B12 in your blood. This includes "active" forms of vitamin B12 that can be used by your body, as well as the "inactive" forms, which cannot be used.Therefore, if a significant amount of the vitamin B12 in your blood is inactive, a blood test may show that you have normal vitamin B12 levels, even though you have vitamin B12 deficiency because of insufficient "active" vitamin B12. Blood tests that only measure the amount of vitamin B12 in your blood that is "active" are not yet widely available.Further tests are then needed to find out the cause of the vitamin B12 deficiency. These further tests include blood tests for intrinsic factor antibodies and gastric parietal cell antibodies. These blood tests help to find out whether you have pernicious anaemia.Vitamin B12 deficiency treatmentYou will need vitamin B12 injections. The injections are usually given frequently at the start of treatment. This quickly builds up the body's store of vitamin B12. Vitamin B12 is stored in the liver. Once a store of vitamin B12 has built up, this can supply the body's needs for several months. An injection is then only usually needed every two to three months to top up the supply.The recommended dose if you do not have any nerve problems caused by pernicious anaemia is initially an injection three times a week for two weeks and then one injection every three months.The recommended dose if you do have any nerve problems caused by pernicious anaemia is initially an injection every other day until there is no further improvement in your symptoms, then one injection every two months.There is a small group of people with vitamin B12 deficiency who report that their symptoms come back (recur) before the usual three-monthly treatment dose. Therefore, some people have injections more often than three-monthly. However, this is not common and is best discussed with your doctor.If you have pernicious anaemia the injections are needed for life. Apart from the discomfort of having an injection, you should have no side-effects from the treatment. The injections are simply replacing a vitamin that you need.If the cause of your lack of vitamin B12 is diet-related rather than due to pernicious anaemia then treatment may be different. That is, after the initial treatment with injections of vitamin B12, dietary supplements of vitamin B12 (cyanocobalamin tablets) may be advised instead of injections. Alternatively, injections of vitamin B12 twice a year may be recommended.Read more in the separate leaflet called Diets Suitable for People with Anaemia.Follow-upThe symptoms of anaemia usually improve quickly once treatment has begun. You may be advised to have a blood test every year or so. This will check that the anaemia is being treated successfully. A blood test may also be done to see that your thyroid gland is working well. (Thyroid problems are more common in people with pernicious anaemia.)Any psychological or nerve problems caused by vitamin B12 deficiency may take a long time to treat and may not fully resolve with treatment. Prolonged or severe vitamin B12 deficiency may therefore cause permanent brain or nerve damage.If you have pernicious anaemia, you are about three times more likely to develop stomach cancer than someone without pernicious anaemia, even when the anaemia is treated. See a doctor soon if you develop any stomach symptoms such as regular indigestion or stomach pain.Previous article   Macrocytosis and Macrocytic AnaemiaAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of cobalamin and folate disorders; British Committee for Standards in Haematology (2014)Anaemia - B12 and folate deficiency; NICE CKS, July 2020 (UK access only)Shipton MJ, Thachil J; Vitamin B12 deficiency - A 21st century perspective . Clin Med (Lond). 2015 Apr15(2):145-50. doi: 10.7861/clinmedicine.15-2-145.Marchi G, Busti F, Zidanes AL, et al; Cobalamin Deficiency in the Elderly. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2020 Jul 112(1):e2020043. doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2020.043. eCollection 2020.Related InformationPernicious Anaemia and B12 Deficiency ProMacrocytosis and Macrocytic Anaemia ProHydroxocobalamin injection (Cobalin-H, Neo-Cytamen)Muscle WeaknessOedema (Swelling)  How to avoid iron deficiency    5 minutes reading time  24-Jun-22  Vitamin B12 deficiency signs you need to know     5 minutes reading time  11-May-19  Signs you may have anaemia     4 minutes reading time  14-Sep-18  Hello, i just had serum b12 results back and its very high 2300 ng/L i have really awful symptoms, which would be same as if i was low in b12?. All my full blood count (liver and kidneys results...   jo782622Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Peer reviewed by  Dr Laurence Knott Document ID  4372 (v42)  Last updated on   16 February 2021 Next review date  15 February 2026 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Macrocytosis and Macrocytic AnaemiaHealth informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Vitamin B12 Deficiency and Pernicious Anaemia     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/allergies-blood-immune/anaemia-leaflet/vitamin-b12-deficiency-and-pernicious-anaemiaCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


