# Vulval Problems | Causes, Diagnosis, and Treatment | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Women's Health  Vulval Problems Last updated by Dr Rachel Hudson   Authored by Dr Louise Newson   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 10 Feb 2023   Originally published 6 Feb 2015   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Bartholin's Cyst and Abscess      Itchy Vulva (Pruritus Vulvae)      Lichen Sclerosus      Vulvitis In this series     Bartholin's Cyst and Abscess      Itchy Vulva (Pruritus Vulvae)      Lichen Sclerosus      Vulvitis There are many different conditions that can affect your vulva, ranging from mild infections to skin conditions and, very rarely, to cancer. They can all cause very different symptoms, including itching, bleeding, rashes or a lump. It is very important that if you notice any new symptoms or lumps in your genital area then you see a doctor promptly. Your doctor will be able to examine you and decide which treatment will be appropriate to you. This will depend on the underlying cause of your symptoms.In this article   How are vulval problems diagnosed?   What causes vulval problems?   How are vulval problems treated?   How to take care of your vulva In This Article     Vulval ProblemsIn this article How are vulval problems diagnosed?  What causes vulval problems?  How are vulval problems treated?  How to take care of your vulva Where is the vulva?Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGP Our picks for Vulval Problems What do normal labia look like?Labia come in all different shapes, sizes, lengths and colours. However, there's a lot of misinf...   5min  What do normal labia look like?   5min  Labiaplasties – what are they and are they ever medically necessary?   7min  Myths about the hymen debunked    6min  How to manage lichen sclerosus and genital itching    5minHow are vulval problems diagnosed?What are the different types of vulvar problems?Prof Lesley Regan, FRCOGThere are various conditions that can affect your vulva. Some are more serious than others. If you notice a new lump or swelling on your vulva or have any bleeding from around your vulva then you must see a doctor promptly.Most conditions that affect your vulva can be diagnosed by examining you. However, it is sometimes necessary for other tests to be undertaken - eg, swabs or a biopsy.The symptoms will depend on the underlying condition. Symptoms may range from pain, itching (pruritus vulvae), and finding a lump to noticing a change in appearance of your vulva. See the separate leaflet called Vulvitis. 1 of 2  What is vulvar itch?Dr Sarah Jarvis MBE, FRCGPVulvar Itch Hide videos   Show videos       What is vulvar itch?     00:55        How to stop vulvar itch?     01:19  Worried about your health?Find a range of women's health pharmacy services, delivered by local providers at a time that suits you Book now What causes vulval problems?InfectionsThrush (yeast infection).Genital herpes infection.Genital warts.Chickenpox.Other infections: these include scabies and pubic lice.Skin conditionsIn babies and toddlers wearing nappies, nappy rash can occur and be very irritating and distressing. Nappy rash can lead to the skin of the vulva and the area round the back passage (anus) becoming bright red and very sore.Any skin condition can affect the vulval area too - eg, eczema, psoriasis, lichen planus and lichen sclerosus.Vulval intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN). This is not vulval cancer but it is a pre-cancerous condition, as VIN (after several years) may develop into vulval cancer in some women.Lumps in the vulvaSome infections such as genital herpes and syphilis can cause lumps.Bartholin's cyst or abscess.Cancer of the vulva.How are vulval problems treated?InfectionsThrush is usually treated with clotrimazole cream from the pharmacy, or sometimes a fluconazole oral tablet. Usually only a short course is required but occasionally longer courses are needed.Genital herpes is treated with aciclovir tablets. You can also soothe the symptoms by bathing in salt water, taking over-the-counter painkillers and drinking more water to dilute your urine. Petroleum jelly or local anesthetic ointments can also be helpful.Genital warts are usually treated at sexual health clinics, often with a self-applied topical treatment such as podophyllotoxin, imiquimod or sinecatechins. However in 30% of people they will disappear with no treatment. People with suppressed immune systems and pregnant women may require different treatments.Chickenpox affecting the genital area can be itchy or sore and this can be alleviated by paracetamol, calamine lotion or antihistamines such as chlorphenamine.Scabies and pubic lice are treated with permethrin cream or malathion lotion. The itching from scabies can continue for up to four weeks after treatment.Skin conditionsNappy rash is mostly treated by measures such as frequent nappy changes, cleaning with water or non-fragranced wipes, patting rather than rubbing dry, and avoiding irritants such as talcum powder and bubble bath/soap. Barrier creams such as white soft paraffin, Metanium® and Bepanthen® help protect the skin. Occasionally, antifungal and steroid creams are needed if the rash is severe and simple measures are not helping.Eczema, psoriasis and lichen planus of the vulva are treated very similarly to other parts of the body, with emollients (moisturising creams/ointments) and steroid creams, as well as other more specialised creams in some cases.Lichen sclerosus is treated with emollients and stronger steroid creams/ointmentsVulval intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN) is usually treated with a small operation to remove the affected area.LumpsBartholin's cyst/abscess often requires antibiotics and sometimes surgical removal.Cancer of the vulva requires treatment by specialist gynaecologists/oncologists and can involve surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy.How to take care of your vulvaVulval skin is very sensitive so it is important to avoid anything that may irritate it. Soap can dry the skin so soap substitutes are preferred - for example, Doublebase® or E45 wash®. Only clean the vulval area once per day as too much washing can make symptoms worse. Showering is preferred to baths but if you do bath, avoid adding bubble bath. Avoid using flannels. Pat gently dry afterwards.Sanitary towels/panty liners and coloured toilet paper can cause irritation. Avoid tight-fitting underwear/clothing and synthetic materials - cotton is best. Fabric conditioners and biological washing powders can also irritate.Using an emollient/moisturiser can help protect the skin, especially if it is dry. Various types are available over the counter. Next article  Bartholin's Cyst and Abscess  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  UK National Guideline on the Management of Vulval Conditions; British Association for Sexual Health and HIV (2014)Lawton S; Nappy rash: diagnosis and treatment. J Fam Health Care. 2014 Jul-Aug24(5):36-40.Reyes MC, Cooper K; An update on vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia: terminology and a practical approach to diagnosis. J Clin Pathol. 2014 Apr67(4):290-4. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2013-202117. Epub 2014 Jan 7.Related InformationHow to manage lichen sclerosus and genital itching Itchy Vulva (Pruritus Vulvae)VulvitisLichen SclerosusBartholin's Cyst and Abscess  What do normal labia look like?    5 minutes reading time  15-Oct-21  Labiaplasties – what are they and are they ever medically necessary?    7 minutes reading time  20-Aug-20  How to manage lichen sclerosus and genital itching     5 minutes reading time  01-Jul-18  Understanding vulvodynia and why it causes painful sex    5 minutes reading time  26-Jan-18  I found that last year may be in October.is that vulvar cancer or VIN?I don't think that's normal..help me   yuni64308Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Authored by   Dr Louise Newson  Last updated by   Dr Rachel Hudson Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  28996 (v3)  Originally published on   06 February 2015  Last updated on   10 February 2023 Next review date  06 January 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Next article Bartholin's Cyst and Abscess Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Vulval Problems      close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/womens-health/vulval-problems-leafletCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


