# What Foods Are Rich In Calcium? | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Bones, Joints and Muscles    Osteoporosis  Calcium-rich Food Last updated by Dr Hayley Willacy   Authored by Alexa Evans   Peer reviewed by Dr Toni Hazell  Last updated 30 Jan 2023   Originally published 29 Aug 2014   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Osteoporosis      DXA Scan      Bisphosphonates      Vitamin D Deficiency      Preventing Steroid-induced Osteoporosis In this series     Osteoporosis      DXA Scan      Bisphosphonates      Vitamin D Deficiency      Preventing Steroid-induced Osteoporosis Calcium is an important nutrient with many functions. It's necessary for nerve function, to help muscles contract and to assist with normal blood clotting. Our primary source of calcium is from food.In this article   Why is calcium important?   Calcium-rich foods   How much calcium do we need?   Why is vitamin D important for calcium? In This Article     Calcium-rich FoodIn this article Why is calcium important?  Calcium-rich foods  How much calcium do we need?  Why is vitamin D important for calcium? Why is calcium important?Calcium is plays an important role in building and maintaining strong teeth and bones. It also helps to prevent loss of bone strength (osteoporosis) as we age.Calcium is the most abundant mineral in the body, but because we can't make it, we need to consume calcium-rich foods instead.Do you need a physiotherapist?Book a private appointment with a local physio today Book now Calcium-rich foodsFoods rich in calcium include:Milk and dairy products.Fish with edible bones, such as tinner salmon.Green, leafy vegetables.Nuts.Seeds.Fruits.Some food manufacturers also enrich food products with calcium by adding it to certain foods - for example, in soya milk, orange juice, cereals and breads. In the UK, all wheat flour except wholemeal must be fortified with calcium.Milk and dairy sources of calciumFoodPortion sizeCalciumMilk (any type)200 ml240 mgYoghurt125 g200 mgCheddar cheese30 g216 mgSoft cheese triangle15 g100 mgCottage cheese100 g73 mgRice pudding200 g180 mgIce cream60 g (one scoop)78 mgCustard120 ml150 mgNon-dairy sources of calciumFoodPortion sizeCalciumSardines100 g (four sardines)410 mgPilchards100 g (two pilchards)340 mgHaddock150 g fillet150 mgBaked beans220 g (one half of a large can)100 mgEnriched soya/rice milk200 ml240 mgEnriched orange juice250 ml300 mgTofu100 g500 mgSpring green100 g200 mgSpinach100 g150 mgWatercress50 g75 mgBroccoli50 g30 mgOkra50 g130 mgKale50 g65 mgChickpeas100 g45 mgAlmonds15 g35 mgBrazil nuts15 g26 mgSesame seedsone tablespoon160 mgDried figs60 g (three figs)150 mgCalcium-enriched breadTwo slices (80 g)300 mgCurrants100 g93 mgHow much calcium do we need?Adults over the age of 18 years need around 700 mg of calcium per day. There are other circumstances where more calcium is required. This may be if you:Are aged 9-18 years (1300 mg). Children aged 4-8 years need about 800 mg per day.Are breastfeeding (1250 mg).Have coeliac disease or Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis (1000-1500 mg).Are a postmenopausal woman or man over 55 years old (1200 mg).Have osteoporosis - loss of bone strength - (1000 mg).Getting enough calciumThere are web pages and apps which will help you add up the calcium in your diet to make sure you are getting as much as you need. See an example of an online calcium calculator  here.If you find it difficult to get enough calcium from your diet - for example, if you are a vegan who is unable to tolerate soya - calcium supplement tablets are available at supermarkets and chemists.Calcium deficiencyYou need to make sure you are consuming enough calcium-rich food if you have low calcium levels in the blood (hypocalcaemia) or are taking steroids. One of the side-effects of taking steroid tablets in the long term (for three months or more) is an increased risk of developing osteoporosis. This is known as steroid-induced osteoporosis.There is some evidence that sodium in the diet, (generally in the form of salt), can increase calcium loss from the body. It is generally a good idea to reduce salt in your diet, but particularly so if you are trying to make sure your body gets plenty of calcium.If you are on additional treatment for osteoporosis (such as alendronic acid) then it is particularly important that you are eating enough calcium, as these treatments will not work if your calcium intake is too low.Side-effects of calcium supplementsPeople who are taking high doses of calcium supplements may increase their risk of heart disease but there is no association of increased risk with a diet which is naturally high in calcium.Why is vitamin D important for calcium?Vitamin D is needed so that the body can absorb calcium effectively.Unlike other vitamins, we do not need to get vitamin D from food. Most of the vitamin D we have is made by our own bodies. It is made in the skin by the action of sunlight. This is a good thing because most foods contain no, or very little, vitamin D naturally.However, this can also be a problem if you live in an area where sunshine cannot be guaranteed (even in summer), or if it is culturally inappropriate for you to have your skin uncovered.How much vitamin D do we need to absorb calcium?The Department of Health and Social Care currently recommends that everyone should take a vitamin D supplement of 10 micrograms (mcg) daily during the winter months (October-March). Some people are at greater risk of vitamin D deficiency; therefore, a routine vitamin D supplement all year round is recommended. This includes:All pregnant and breastfeeding women.All babies and young children aged 6 months to 5 years should take a daily supplement containing vitamin D in the form of vitamin drops. However, those infants who are fed infant formula will not need vitamin drops until they are receiving less than 500 ml of infant formula a day, as these products are fortified with vitamin D. Breast-fed infants may need to receive drops containing vitamin D from 1 month of age if their mother has not taken vitamin D supplements throughout pregnancy.People aged 65 years and over.People who are not exposed to much sun, or who have darker skin.See the separate leaflet called Vitamin D Deficiency for further information.Previous article   Bisphosphonates Next article  Vitamin D Deficiency  Are you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Osteoporosis: assessing the risk of fragility fracture; NICE Clinical Guideline (August 2012, updated February 2017)Clinical guideline for the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis; National Osteoporosis Guideline Group (updated September 2021)Vitamin D and health; Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (July 2016)Hofmeyr GJ, Lawrie TA, Atallah AN, et al; Calcium supplementation during pregnancy for preventing hypertensive disorders and related problems. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Oct 110:CD001059. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001059.pub5.Palacios A, Rojas-Roque C, Balan D, et al; Fortification of staple foods with calcium: a novel costing tool to inform decision making. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2022 Jul1513(1):79-88. doi: 10.1111/nyas.14775. Epub 2022 Mar 31.Warensjo Lemming E, Byberg L, Hoijer J, et al; Combinations of dietary calcium intake and mediterranean-style diet on risk of hip fracture: A longitudinal cohort study of 82,000 women and men. Clin Nutr. 2021 Jun40(6):4161-4170. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2021.01.043. Epub 2021 Feb 5.Related InformationCalcium and ergocalciferol tablets (CalciErgo, A1 Cal-E)Calcium with colecalciferol (Adcal-D3, Calcichew-D3, Calci-D)Calcium supplements (Adcal, Calcichew, Phosex)  How to boost your vitamin D levels this winter    8 minutes reading time  16-Nov-23  Chemical found in soap and toothpaste linked to osteoporosis     2 minutes reading time  26-Jun-19  When to start worrying about your bones and osteoporosis    6 minutes reading time  21-Dec-17  Why the menopause may cause osteoporosis    4 minutes reading time  18-Oct-17  hello , I was referred for a dexa scan after a relatively minor fall resulted in serious fractures of my Tibia Fibula and 4 Metatarsals . I had extensive surgery to fix my bones with plates and...   maria5555Join the discussion on the forumsArticle Information Authored by   Alexa Evans  Last updated by   Dr Hayley Willacy Peer reviewed by  Dr Toni Hazell Document ID  28813 (v3)  Originally published on   29 August 2014  Last updated on   30 January 2023 Next review date  04 December 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  BisphosphonatesNext article Vitamin D Deficiency Health informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on What Foods Are Rich In Calcium?     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/bones-joints-muscles/osteoporosis-leaflet/calcium-rich-dietCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


