# What is infective endocarditis? | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Heart Health and Blood Vessels    Heart Valve Disease  Infective Endocarditis Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy   Peer reviewed by Dr Adrian Bonsall  Last updated 1 Aug 2017   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Heart Valve Disease      Mitral Stenosis      Mitral Regurgitation      Aortic Stenosis      Aortic Regurgitation In this series     Heart Valve Disease      Mitral Stenosis      Mitral Regurgitation      Aortic Stenosis      Aortic Regurgitation This page has been archived. It has not been updated since 01/08/2017. External links and references may no longer work.Infective endocarditis is an infection that affects some part of the tissue that lines the inside of the heart chambers (the endocardium). The infection usually involves one or more heart valves which are part of the endocardium. It is a serious infection that is life-threatening.In this article   Symptoms   Causes   Complications   Diagnosis   Treatment   What is the outlook? In This Article     Infective EndocarditisIn this article Symptoms  Causes  Complications  Diagnosis  Treatment  What is the outlook? SymptomsIn many cases the infection develops quite slowly (over weeks or months). This is sometimes called subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE). In some cases the symptoms develop quite quickly and you can become very unwell over a few days. The symptoms may include:You tend to feel generally unwell.You may have general aches and pains and tiredness.You may be off your food.A high temperature (fever) develops at some stage in most cases.CausesMost cases are caused by infection with germs (bacteria). A small number of cases are caused by infection with fungi. To develop this infection, you need to have some bacteria or fungi in the bloodstream. Bacteria or fungi may get into the blood if you have an infection or wound in another part of the body. In particular, dental and mouth infections. Most bacteria that get into the bloodstream are killed by the immune system. However, sometimes some bacteria survive. They may then settle on a heart valve (particularly if the valve is already damaged in some way), or on another section of the tissue that lines the inside of the heart chambers (the endocardium). Once a small focus of infection develops in the endocardium it is difficult for the immune system to clear it.In time, small clumps of material called vegetations may develop on infected valves. Fragments of the vegetations may also break off and travel in the bloodstream to other parts of the body.Endocarditis is uncommon. In the UK it occurs in about 20 in a million people each year. It can occur in anybody but the risk of developing it is increased in people who have:Heart valve problems or an artificial heart valve. Heart valves that are already damaged or abnormal are more likely to become infected.Had surgery to a heart valve.Certain congenital heart defects.A heart condition called hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Had a previous episode of infective endocarditis.Been injecting street drugs such as heroin, with dirty or contaminated needles.A poor immune system - for example, people with AIDS.ComplicationsComplications usually develop if the infection is left untreated or if treatment is delayed. The infection can damage heart valves. This can lead to serious problems such as heart failure. See separate leaflet called Heart Failure.Small bits may break off from the vegetations on the infected heart valves. These are called infected emboli and get carried in the bloodstream, then lodging in other parts of the body. This can cause various symptoms - for example:Small spots may appear under fingernails, in the eyes or on other parts of the body.Infections may develop in other parts of the body.The spleen may enlarge, as it is the main organ that fights off blood infections.A larger chunk of vegetation may get stuck in an artery in the brain it can cause a stroke or sudden loss of vision in one eye.DiagnosisYou will be admitted to hospital if infective endocarditis is suspected. You will have several blood samples taken which are tested for germs (bacteria) and fungi. If any bacteria are detected in the blood, they are tested against various antibiotics to find which is the best one to use. Some bacteria are resistant to some antibiotics. Therefore, the best antibiotic to use can vary from case to case.An ultrasound scan of the heart (echocardiography, or 'echo') is the most useful test to confirm infective endocarditis. This test uses reflected sound waves to create an image of the heart. It can detect vegetations and look for damage to heart valves and other heart structures.Various other tests or scans may be done to find out the extent of the infection and to assess the damage to the heart or other affected organs.TreatmentAntibiotic treatment is all that is required in many cases. However, an operation is needed in up to half of cases when the infection is more severe.MedicationAs soon as the condition is suspected you will be given regular doses of antibiotics that are injected directly into a vein. The course of antibiotics is for at least 2-4 weeks but it is often longer. The length of course depends on the germ (bacterium) causing the infection and whether there are complications.If the cause of the infection is found to be a fungus then antifungal medicines will be given.If you develop complications to the heart or to other parts of the body, you may need other medication. For example, you may need medicines to counter heart failure or erratic heartbeats, should they develop.SurgeryAn operation can be life-saving. Operations that may be done include:Replacing a damaged valve with an artificial valve.Valve repair if the damage is less severe and repair is possible.Drainage of any collections of pus (abscesses) that may develop in the heart muscle or in other parts of the body.What is the outlook?The outlook (prognosis) is good if the infection is diagnosed and treated early. Many people are cured with a course of antibiotics. However, it is quite common for the infection to be quite advanced before the diagnosis is made and treatment is started. Therefore, serious damage to the heart occurs in some cases. Some people die from the complications.Previous article   Aortic RegurgitationAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, et al; 2017 AHA/ACC Focused Update of the 2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of Patients With Valvular Heart Disease. Circulation. 2017 CIR.0000000000000503. Originally published March 15, 2017.2023 ESC Guidelines for the management of infective endocarditis; European Society of Cardiology (Aug 2023)Prophylaxis against infective endocarditis: Antimicrobial prophylaxis against infective endocarditis in adults and children undergoing interventional procedures; NICE Clinical Guideline (March 2008 - last updated July 2016)Vahanian A et al; Guidelines on the management of valvular heart disease: The Task Force on the Management of Valvular Heart Disease of the European Society of Cardiology, 2017Ozkan M; What is new in ACC/AHA 2017 focused update of valvular heart disease guidelines. Anatol J Cardiol. 2017 Jun17(6):421-422. doi: 10.14744/AnatolJCardiol.2017.7925.Related InformationPrevention of Infective Endocarditis ProInfective Endocarditis (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment) ProAortic Regurgitation ProAortic Stenosis (Signs, Symptoms and Treatment) ProMitral Regurgitation Pro  Anatomy of the heart and blood vessels  Celebrities and their heart problems    4 minutes reading time  21-Sep-17  Every now and then I get this weird feeling in the left side of my chest which can last anywhere from 1min to 45mins+. During the duration of the episode, whenever I exhale or inhale beyond a certain...   jake55266Join the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Colin Tidy Peer reviewed by  Dr Adrian Bonsall Document ID  4680 (v46)  Last updated on   01 August 2017 Status  Archived The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  Aortic RegurgitationHealth informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on What is infective endocarditis?     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/heart-health/heart-valves-and-valve-disease/infective-endocarditisCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up


