# Worm Medicine (Anthelmintics): Mebendazole, Vermox, Ovex | Patient

       TOPICS       HEALTH INFOChild HealthHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthPregnancySexual HealthSkin ConditionsTravel VaccinationsTreatment and MedicationWomen's HealthView all categoriesCATEGORIESBones and JointsCancerDiabetesDigestive HealthEye CareHealthy LivingInfectionsSigns and SymptomsView all categoriesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? TREATMENT       MEDICINES AND DRUGSNervous SystemHeart DiseaseInfectionsInflammationPainkillersSkin ConditionsMuscle PainEye CareView all Medicines and DrugsTREATMENT FORMigraineInfectionHeart DiseaseDepressionEpilepsyType 2 DiabetesBacterial VaginosisDementiaView all Treatments RESOURCES       TOOLS AND TESTSBMI CalculatorPregnancy Due Date CalculatorSTI TestsScreening TestsBlood TestsLiver Function TestsAm I Pregnant?Am I Depressed?View all ToolsEXPLORELatest FeaturesHealth VideosAbout UsAuthorsRecipesQuizzesTry our Symptom Checker Got any other symptoms? PROFESSIONAL       PRO ARTICLESBronchiolitisOsmolalityMolluscum ContagiosumActinic KeratosisAbdominal Pain in ChildrenSubdural HaematomaObesity in AdultsDepressionView all Pro ArticlesMEDICAL CALCULATORSPHQ-9GAD-76CITGPCOGAUDITCAGEView all Medical CalculatorsCommunityNewsletter More       CommunityNewsletter    Login / RegisterLogin / Register  Patient Access  .       Search   Health Info    Skincare and Conditions    Itchy Bottom (Pruritus Ani)  Worm Medicines Anthelmintics Last updated by Dr Hayley Willacy   Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy  Last updated 19 Jul 2023   Meets Patient’s editorial guidelines            Save       Remove from Saved       Download      Share      FeedbackAdded to  Saved itemsIn this series    In this series:     Itchy Bottom (Pruritus Ani)      Threadworms In this series     Itchy Bottom (Pruritus Ani)      Threadworms Worms are parasites that enter the body and are able to live and feed off the person they have entered. The most common worm infection in the UK is threadworms. Medicines to treat worms are sometimes called anthelmintics. Mebendazole (trade names Vermox®, Ovex®) is the most commonly prescribed medicine for worms in the UK.In this article   What are worms?   Which medicines are usually prescribed for worm infections?   How does worm medicine work??   How long do you take worm medicine for?   Side-effects of worm medicine   Who cannot take worm medicine?   Can you buy worm medicine? In This Article     Worm MedicinesAnthelminticsIn this article What are worms?  Which medicines are usually prescribed for worm infections?  How does worm medicine work??  How long do you take worm medicine for?  Side-effects of worm medicine  Who cannot take worm medicine?  Can you buy worm medicine? What are worms?Worms (sometimes called helminths) are parasites that enter the body and are able to live and feed off the person they have entered. There are many types of worms and they are usually divided into three groups:Roundworms - the most common roundworm infections are thought to be caused by threadworms, ascaris, hookworms and trichuris. Roundworm eggs usually enter the body by the person eating food or drinking water that contains eggs. The eggs live and hatch in the gut (intestine).Tapeworms - these worms live in the gut. People usually become infected by eating raw or uncooked meat.Flukeworms - these worms can live in the blood vessels, gut, lungs or liver. You usually become infected with flukeworms by swimming or washing in fresh water that contains flukeworms. An infection with flukeworms causes a tropical disease called schistosomiasis.Most worm infections occur in warm tropical countries or developing countries where food and water may not be clean. It is thought that millions of people around the world are infected with worms at any one time.In the UK the most common worm infection is threadworms - this is a type of roundworm and is sometimes referred to as a pinworm. Threadworms are spread by being in contact with someone who is already infected with threadworms. Threadworms can cause an itchy bottom.See the separate leaflet called Itchy Bottom (Pruritus Ani) .Other types of worm infections can occur if you live in the UK; however, they do not occur very often. People who get these infections have usually been travelling in countries where these types of worm infections are common.The rest of this leaflet discusses the medicines that may be used to treat worm infections. See the separate leaflets called Roundworms, Threadworms and Schistosomiasis.Note: ringworm in not an infection caused by worms. It is a name given to a type of fungal skin infection.Which medicines are usually prescribed for worm infections?There are several medicines that may be used to treat worm infections - they are sometimes called anthelmintics. Mebendazole is the most commonly prescribed medicine that treats threadworms in the UK. Mebendazole is also used to treat roundworm, whipworm and hookworm infections.Other medicines that may be prescribed for the various types of worm infections include:Levamisole.Niclosamide.Praziquantel.Albendazole.Diethylcarbamazine.Ivermectin.Tiabendazole.These medicines are not licensed for use in the UK and are specially imported to treat more unusual worm infections. They are usually prescribed by doctors who specialise in treating worm infections.Suffer from dermatitis?Book a private appointment with a local pharmacist today to discover treatment options Book now How does worm medicine work??Most medicines used to treat worm infections kill worms by either starving them or paralysing them; for example:Mebendazole, albendazole and tiabendazole work by preventing the worms from absorbing the sugars they need for survival. They kill the worms but not the eggs.Praziquantel and ivermectin work by paralysing the worms in the gut (intestine). This allows them to be easily dislodged and removed from the gut in the stools (faeces).How long do you take worm medicine for?In general, the length of treatment is usually quite short (at most a few days). This will depend on what type of worm you have and which medicine has been prescribed. For example, for threadworms, mebendazole is usually given as a single one-off dose. This dose may be repeated two weeks later. For whipworm or common roundworm infections, mebendazole is given twice a day for three days.For threadworms, it is usually advised that everybody in the household be treated if possible as this will help prevent reinfection.Side-effects of worm medicineIt is not possible to list all the side-effects of these medicines in this leaflet. If you want more information specific to your medicine, see the information leaflet that came with your medicine.In general, medicines for worms are well tolerated and very rarely cause serious side-effects. The side-effects most commonly reported are tummy upsets such as cramps, wind, diarrhoea and feeling sick (nausea).Who cannot take worm medicine?There are very few people who cannot take a medicine for worm infections. If for some reason one medicine has caused a side-effect or there is a reason you cannot take one, your doctor will discuss other ways to treat you.Mebendazole is licensed for adults and for children over the age of 2 years. However, it is used to treat children from the age of 6 months if necessary. Mebendazole is usually avoided if you are pregnant or breastfeeding. If treatment in pregnancy is considered to be absolutely necessary it is safest to give it in the second or third trimester.Can you buy worm medicine?For adults and for children aged over 2 years, you can buy mebendazole to treat threadworms, from your local pharmacy. If you need to treat threadworms in a child under 2 years of age, discuss this with your doctor. If you have been abroad and think you have another type of worm infection, see your doctor.How to use the Yellow Card SchemeIf you think you have had a side-effect to one of your medicines you can report this on the Yellow Card Scheme. You can do this online at www.mhra.gov.uk/yellowcard.The Yellow Card Scheme is used to make pharmacists, doctors and nurses aware of any new side-effects that medicines or any other healthcare products may have caused. If you wish to report a side-effect, you will need to provide basic information about:The side-effect.The name of the medicine which you think caused it.The person who had the side-effect.Your contact details as the reporter of the side-effect.It is helpful if you have your medication - and/or the leaflet that came with it - with you while you fill out the report.Previous article   ThreadwormsAre you protected against flu?See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today.Check nowJoin our weekly wellness digestfrom the best health experts in the businessEnter your email   Join now Please enter a valid email address. By clicking ‘Join now’ you agree to our Terms and conditions and Privacy policy.Further reading and references  Threadworm; NICE CKS, February 2023 (UK access only)Roundworm; NICE CKS, March 2018 (UK access only)About Parasites; Centers for Disease Control and PreventionBritish National Formulary (BNF); NICE Evidence Services (UK access only)Related InformationRoundwormsThreadwormsRoundworms (Nematodes) ProThreadworms ProAscaris Lumbricoides Pro  How to get rid of threadworms     4 minutes reading time  31-May-19  Common causes of an itchy bottom    3 minutes reading time  27-Dec-18  Hi All,  I dont know if anyone has come across this.  I have a worm infestation in my face.  They travel around under the skin leaving tracks and bursting holes into my skin.  they create glass like...   nicolamcJoin the discussion on the forums Health Tools Feeling unwell?Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Start symptom checker Article Information Last updated by   Dr Hayley Willacy Peer reviewed by  Dr Colin Tidy Document ID  13923 (v5)  Last updated on   19 July 2023 Next review date  17 July 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians.Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions.Previous article  ThreadwormsHealth informationMedicine directoryCommunitySymptom CheckerMedical professionalsAbout usAuthorsContact usTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookie policyAdvertise with usSponsored editorial guidelinesSponsored leaflet guidelinesOur clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Health information you can trustPatient aims to help the world proactively manage its healthcare, supplying evidence-based information on a wide range of medical and health topics to patients and health professionals.Our clinical information meets the standards set by the NHS in their Standard for Creating Health Content guidance. Read our editorial policy.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram © Egton Medical Information Systems Limited. Registered in England and Wales. All rights reserved. Patient does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.Registered number: 10004395 Registered office: Fulford Grange, Micklefield Lane, Rawdon, Leeds, LS19 6BA. Patient is a UK registered trade mark.Connect with us    twitter     facebook     youtube     pinterest     instagram Notes on Worm Medicine (Anthelmintics): Mebendazole, Vermox, Ovex     close Share          Facebook     Twitter     LinkedIn     WhatsApp     Emailhttps://patient.info/skin-conditions/itchy-bottom-pruritus-ani/worm-medicines-anthelminticsCopy link Copiednewnav-downnewnav-up

